THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


*hoarqoadsaz % ‘ON 10440 PUL gE °O N 49430 ‘g ‘on 1ayi10 ST “ON 39132 pal[vo 
og[y are ouuid juos<yd ayy Jo suazzuM of10q}0 puy oLoyjerodus ‘oimojeqns ‘aWo{T EYL 














+“ | ; 
PHOS 
| Apog | Gaus) “ bh ssl 
(sors{y gy sory *L 4 ) pny <7 
| : ) ‘* snoasuyg ie s = 
| Spog trosAy 4 f ) “ opauty es a 5 | 
| coming ae Ing 42 & 
siqnog oayig “9 4 a) ieee, $2/ 3 
my: (ung | ) ‘ almozyqng =, te! 
| | 64} WIOIJ) BUYA “Gf |, ) ay¥jg onnio7y 7) ely 
ei 1. re Hs 
BL nog ronttty | Sz )emmsorwery 
a "f IO ‘Buus g-BUUyY { 7 a-F 
SI pees 13 9, 
° | t= rJ : =! 
a 4 : 3 eB A! 
2 > yeuysy Jomoy 2 5 GF Es 
be ¥dny-vinusy a0 - S54 >!'9 5: 
E, ‘Spog onsog ao pensy % a a J 27 8 2 
QO ; ences y Pian 
‘ er 272 3s 
a} pegsy sys Ze = | 2.03 | 
Lees f ~ 4 as 9 
See toeey __t nog uvuingp |e : eet-e-2 
(fo ‘suauyy-vty ~ 7 —— pee Ra Son 
A ——' wyoy vduyq Ze = | wi 
Spog jeyuoyy ; |" _ 4 40 ‘sjaso7], 5 ee 5 | 5 
. | + aioe 2238) 8 
nee SY AMGLVR €U SANYIg "NFATE? aR 
| re 
XVW 40 NOMALILSNOD = = 
eSATA | Z oe 


SNUAL TVOIHGOSOAHL AO F1EViAL 


ee ed 


eal 






Date 
. we a 
aoe 
to. 
1b a 
wg et on. 
ape he: 
mee 
Sa a ne 
oy 
ooo 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


IN 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


BY 


P. PAVRI, B.Sc., L.C.E. 


Second Edition 


(Revised and Enlarged) 


To be had from 


THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING HOUSE 
ADYAR, MADRAS, INDIA 


Available for sale also from: 


Mr. P. PAVRI, B.Sc., L.C.E., 
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, 
ADYAR, MADRAS. 


INDIAN BOOK-SHOP, 
BENARES Clty. 


ee ne A LP 





Spog osueq) ( (q980eqG8 POOT) rat 
(oqytmy) | ¢ oe BysO3T (saa] Biequy) 
BIBULAYSIBA jerdue ( aig adeamead 5 eee oe ee 
ne were c eo a ae C - 
Y}BOIq-93!'T) 4 —— 
Busoyy \ WIWsy Be a 4. | “2 
efemevusig ao ayiig=|—"_ ae 
= - fey 
; | a She | oS | | ‘7 | 
\—— | | 
| (ssqy Buns A). t eqopreangg, 
es aang) | (q7#24S PUL) a 
(mva2q1) wILTEys i te wage 
ssaltey, suduag eugs_ng ehewmous]y | seey = = - ‘9 
b Ben ideo Bee, eee a 
Siete. MR ak foes | ae | | : 
| | (eaoge By) = t BYAOPIBAG 
| | | —! 
-- aoe em i—— 
s, die thos ee Ogee Bate a (mizaug C , i cote as 
a | | | i2 
: | ts 








(97907 snoraesd 07 butpuodsess0p) 


SNUAL IVINGIGO dO ATEVEL 


IN HIS NAME 





FOREWORD 


As beginners in the study of Theosophy ask numerous 
questions, an attempt has been made in this book to 
present the broad teachings of Theosophy in a systematic 
way in the form of questions and answers. The material 
collected here is drawn from over seventy books and 
pamphlets, mainly the works of that wonderful occultist, 
Bishop C. W. Leadbeater, and the famous President of 
the Theosophical Society, Dr. Annie Besant. The purpose 
of this book is to make the study of Theosophy a little 
eaSler in its elementary stage, before more advanced and 
comprehensive books, dealing with abstruse and meta- 
physical questions, are taken up for study. 

My sincere thanks are due to Mr. Ernest Wood, 
Secretary, Theosophical Educational Trust, and Principal, 
Sind National College, and to Mr. H. C. Kumar, Vice-Prin- 
cipal, Sind National College, for many useful suggestions 
and practical help. 

P. PAVRI 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


ADVANTAGE is taken of the increasing demand for this 
book to revise, enlarge and bring it up-to-date. 

I have to thank Mr. Yadunandan Prasad, M.A. 
{Cantab.], for his valuable help, as well as Mr. F. B. Patell 
the author of ‘ Theosophy’ in Gujarati, which forms the 


basis of the earlier part of this book. 
ee 


PREFACE 


EveER since the year 1875 witnessed the revival of 
Theosophy in the world of modern thought, particularly 
through the agency of the Theosophical Society, thinking 
people in every country have been steadily adopting its 
explanations of life’s difficulties and mysteries. Many 
who have studied deeply have been convinced, by experience 
or thought, of the truth of its accumulated teachings, and 
hundreds of thousands of others of less studious disposition 
have come to regard them as in the highest degree probable 
—the safest and most reliable guide in human life. Though 
many of the statements with regard to such matters as the 
life after death, the law of justice (karma), and the pilgrim- 
age of the soul to human perfection through repeated 
rebirths or reincarnations, come to us on the distinct 
authority of great Himalayan adepts, sages and seers, and 
their assistants in the outer world, supported by the teach- 
ings of many religions and the experiences of many ancient 
and modern mystics and philosophers of East and West, 
those statements are deeply satisfying to the scientific and 
logical mind, and the requirements of our best moral 
Opinions and conscientious intuitions. In addition to this, 
many private investigators along the line of self-training 
advocated for those eager for direct knowledge have 
learned by their own immediate supersensuous experience 
of the truth of one or more of the facts presented to the 


world. The philosophy thus satisfies all the three human 
B 


x 


instruments of true knowledge: authority, reasoning and 
direct perception. 

Yet it is not merely a subject for philosophers and 
the schools. Above all, it is for ‘‘ the man in the street ”’. 
It brings to him that mind and heart-satisfying knowledge 
which makes life a perpetual joy, full of purpose and 
power. It makes him realise the deceitfulness of most of 
life’s difficulties and trials, and their true place as instru- 
ments of immediate progress; so that like the swan of 
eastern fable, he becomes able, almost without effort, to 
separate the milk from the water of common life. By it 
he learns that both labour and unselfish love are never 
denied their fruits and their full satisfaction. 

It is with regard to this practical aspect of Theosophy 
that Professor P. T. Pavri has compiled his work, so as to 
place the whole subject in clear and decided light before 
the general reader. His work has been a labour of love 
resulting from careful studies extending over several years 
in the intervals of his duties as an Engineer and later as 
student at Adyar and as Professor in the Sind National 
College. That his presentation has been eminently 
successful will be apparent to all who glance through the 
pages of the book, which is most conveniently arranged so 
that it is equally useful to the continuous reader and one 
who prefers to dip here and there. 

I should strongly recommend this book also to Theo- 
sophical study groups in Lodges and elsewhere, particularly 
as a Theosophical dictionary or companion to be resorted 
to when difficulties and doubts arise. It is up-to-date, 
and full of useful detail. 

ERNEST WooD 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
Foreword ; : ‘ , ; . vii 
Preface . : : : ‘ ; i ix 
CHAPTER I 
WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 

Whether Theosophy is a religion 1 
Deeper problems of life. : : 1 

General belief that problems ey to man, God, 
luck or fate, death, etc., are beyond the ken of man 2 


Whether matters not specifically dealt with by 
particular Scriptures should be considered by the 


followers thereof as true 2 
Reasons why so many people not euly show a , dislike 

to Theosophy, but are positively against it . : 2 
Fundamental principles of Theosophy . 3 
Rough outline of the teachings of Theosophy . 4 
Theosophy and the RRO pO sce cea the pends 

of the T. S. : & 
Proofs of the usefulness of Theosophy . ; 5 
Need for the starting of the Theosophical Society ‘ 6 
Whether every one can study Theosophy : : 7 
Advantage of the spread of Theosophy : 7 
Three objects of the Theosophical Society ; frat 

object : Universal Brotherhood of Humanity : 7 


How universal brotherhood is possible in spite of 
religious quarrels amongst followers of the same 
religion j ‘ ‘ ; , ‘ 7 


Second object : Comparative study of religion ; 8 


How fundamentally all religions are one even though 
the different world-religions apparently differ so 
widely : ; , : : ‘ 

How essentials of all religions are the same ; reason 
why Truth, though found in all religions, appears 
so dissimilar in different religions . : ‘ 

Centra! ideas or key-notes of different religions : 

Whether, after all, nenORey also cannot be called 
a religion 

Whether the T.S. Sacets to its embers following 
any particular religion ; ‘ 

Points of difference between seen snd what is 
ordinarily called a religion 

Third object of the T. S. (The eeconicll Seite) 

Whether Modern Science is antagonistic to Theos- 
ophy . ; ‘ ; ; ; ‘ 

Whether Theosophy is a science 

What Theosophy teaches of philosophy 

Whether certain things posited by Theosophy ned 
man and his evolution, Reincarnation and Karma, 
existence of the Masters, etc., are facts that can be 
demonstrated . : ‘ : : 

Whether T. S. members are all required to be vege- 


tarians and teetotallers ; ; : ‘ 
Reason why many prominent T. 8S. members are 
Strict veyetarians , ‘: : 
Vegetarianism and the true relation of the oh sical 
body to the inner man ; . ; ‘ 
Whether vegetarianism is practicable ; whether a man 
can live without flesh diet. ‘ , ; 


Why vegetarian dict is superior to flesh food . 

Merely washing the body and putting on clean clothes 
i8 not cleanliness ; meaning of real purity 

Even though, according to modern theories, every- 
thing is living, why we should not as well eat 
animals a8 vegetables ‘ ; ‘ ; 

Even though bigger animals live on smaller ones, 
why man should not follow that rule and live on 
animal flesh . F ; F : ‘ 


PAGE 


15 
17 


17 
18 


18 
19 
20 


32 


33 


How fundamentally all religions are one even though 
the different world-religions apparently differ so 
widely ; ‘ : : : ‘ 

How essentials of all religions are the same; reason 
why Truth, though found in all religions, appears 
so dissimilar in different religions . ' : 

Central ideas or key-notes of different religions 3 

Whether, after all, aes also cannot be called 
a religion 

Whether the T.S. Spicets to its enibebe following 
any particular religion : é 

Points of difference between See sal what is 
ordinarily called a religion 

Third object of the T. S. (The axopMieal Society) 

Whether Modern Science is antagonistic to Theos- 
ophy . . : , ; ; ; 

Whether Theosophy is a science 

What Theosophy teaches of philosophy 

Whether certain things posited by Theosophy shou 
man and his evolution, Reincarnation and Karma, 
existence of the Masters, etc., are facts that can be 
demonstrated . : ‘ F ‘ 

Whether T. S. members are all required to be vege- 


tarians and teetotallers : ‘ ‘ ; 
Reason why many prominent T. S. members are 
Strict veyetarians ‘ ; ; 
Vegetarianism and the true relation of the phy eal 
body to the inner man ‘ : 
Whether vegetarianism is practicable ; aehieliier @ man 
can live without flesh diet. ; : ‘ 


Why vegetarian dict is superior to flesh food . 

Merely washing the body and putting on clean clothes 
i8 not cleanliness ; meaning of real purity 

Even though, according to modern theories, every- 
thing is living, why we should not as well eat 
animals a8 vegetables ‘ : ; : 

Even though bigger animals live on smaller ones, 
why man should not follow that rule and live on 
animal flesh . , ; : : i 


PAGE 


15 
17 


17 
18 


18 
19 
20 


two 
two 


23 
24 
31 
32 


33 


x1V 


How our solar system is formed ; ; ; 
Seven states or kinds of matter ; planes of nature. 
What the seven planes of nature have to do with our 

earth ; how our earth is formed ? ' : 
Whether our earth is formed of mere physical matter 
How different kinds of matter occupy the same space 

without displacing one another : 
Where the seven planes of nature are igastad on our 


earth e e e e e e e 
Names of the seven planes or renee 
worlds : ; ‘ 


How each plane is subdivided ; wubatates of evattae ; 


Whether the different worlds or planes as well as 
Subplanes are a cd of different kinds of 


matter ; ; 
Detailed explanation of ove as far as the physical 
world is concerned . ; . 
Why we are not normally conscious of the seven 
planes existing all round us . : : ‘ 
How the existence of things not cognised by the 
physical senses can be proved : ; 
How to prove the existence of supernatural powers in 
man . : : ; : ; : 


How far the matter of the subtler worlds extends 
Our connection with the higher worlds or planes 


CHAPTER III 
THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 


What Theosophy has to say on the subject of the 
constitution of man in addition to what is known 
to western science . ‘ : ; 

How Theosophy explains the constitution of man 

How the Monad, the true self, manifests himself in 
the lower worlds even when he stays all the while 
in the Monddic or Anup&adaka world; the three 
elementals s e e e e e 


PAGE 
o7 
59 


60 
60 


-60 
61 
61 


68 
68 


69 


XV 


Mental and astral elementals ; 
Physical elemental, its functions and nature . ; 
Why the real man wants 80 many bodies or vehicles ; 


whether he cannot work without these coverings or 
garments ; ‘ ; 


What the causal body is ; eogtie it ig so called . 
Shape and use of the causal body ‘ ‘ : 


Whether undesirable qualities acquired by a man in 


the course of his evolution pass into his causal 
body . ‘ : 


How we can help on the growth of our causal ody 
Mental body of man and its function . 
How the mind body grows : 
Why some persons have a fine head for satiematica 


and some a fine ear for music, while others have 
these faculties practically undeveloped 


Functions of the astral body . ; : ; 
Improvement of the astral body ‘ ; ‘ 
Change in the astral body during sleep; its functions 
during the waking and sleeping states of man ; 
What Theosophy adds to our knowledge of the physi- 
cal body as acquired through western science ; 


Proofs that each cell in our physical body has a life or 
consciousness of its own ; 


Life in a piece of stone . ‘ 


Whether it is the ‘I’ manifesting dicoade the body, 
or the particles which make up the cells of the body, 


that die at the time of the man’s death ‘ ‘ 
What the etheric double is r : ‘ 
Why one man has a beautiful etheric double and 
another a defective one é P 


Whether the physical body and its eiherte. double 
having to stay together are pepe on each other 


for their existence . ; ; ‘ 
Fate of the etheric double at die time of death 2 
Etheric double—the vehicle of Prana or vitality ; what 
Prana is e ® e 6 t e 


PAGE 
71 
76 


7 
18 
719 


84 


86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
90 
91 
93 
93 
94. 
94 


XV1 


Whether a man is the same while asleep and while 
awake, or whether there is any change during sleep. 


Whether a man leaving his physical body during 
sleep dies every night and comes to life again every 


morn . : : : ; ; ; 
The Seven Principles of man . ; : ; 
What Kiama is . , : ‘ ‘ : 
What Manas is . ; ? 
The two higher seineinies= Aland | Buddhi ‘ 


Reason of the great difference between animal and 
man even though the four lower principles are com- 
mon to both . , ‘ ° ; 


How a man comes into contact with the different 
planes by means of his different principles . 


The number of bodies each man has . : 

Dreams and how they are caused ; : : 
Practical suggestions as to how to remember dreams . 
Whether we can recognise a friend or acquaintance in 


the astral or the mental world merely by his 
appearance, in absence of his physical body : 


Aureola seen in pictures round the heads of saints 


CHAPTER IV 


REINCARNATION 


Meaning of reincarnation ; ‘ ; ‘ 
What it is that reincarnates ; object of reincarnation . 
Reason for repeated reincarnations, even though there- 
by we have to suffer over and over again : 
Whether it is unjust for us to be punished for 
forgotten misdeeds perpetrated long ago ina past 
life; why a man should suffer for what he is not 
conscious of having done. ; ‘ : 


Why we have no memory of past lives ; ‘ 


PAGE 


96 


98 
98 
99 
100 
100 


101 
101 
102 


103 
114 


118 
119 


122 
122 


124 


124 
126 


XVil 


Reason why an elderly man is not always wiser and 
more intelligent than a mere boy; why a civilised 
youth of twenty years is more intelligent than a 
coolie of fifty . ; , , : : 

Whether a negro boy if nurtured and trained in Europe 
will not be as intelligent and wise as a European boy 

Whether reincarnation ignores the Law of Heredity 
which states that the physical, mental and moral 
peculiarities of children come from the parents 

Special creation by God for each soul; three explana- 
tions for human inequalities, of differences of 
faculties, opportunities and circumstances: the 
scientific Law of Heredity, Special Creation by God 
and Reincarnation 

How the increase of nepnlation in ihe world can ie 
explained without the theory of special creation and 
with a fixed number of human egos returning to 


earth over and over again. ; ; ; 
Necessity for reincarnation ‘ : ; : 
Argument about reincarnation from logic ; 


Scientific necessity for reincarnation 
Moral necessity for reincarnation ; 
How to explain the seemingly useless birth of a new- 

born babe dying immediately after birth ; 


Belief in reincarnation found in religions and philos- 
ophy, ancient and modern ; approximate number 
of people who believe in the idea of reincarnation 
as part of their religious creed ; 

Whether reincarnation is alien to Christianity . 

Reason why reincarnation, though a Christian doc- 
trine, has disappeared from modern Christianity . 


Three principal factors which determine the next birth 


of a man ; ; ‘ , : ‘ 
Whether in a new life we come again into contact 
with the people we love or hate in this life. : 
How the new mental, astral and physical vehicles are 
formed for a new life : : : ; 
Why some persons are born deformed, dwarfed, 
orcrippled . : : : : : 


PAGE 


129 
130 


130 


132 


XVill 


Whether the fate of deformity of the physical body 
is not horrible in the case of a person who has to 
be cruel for the ultimate good of others : ‘ 

Whether it is always the case that a child born of 
parents of low type is entirely low, and that a 
highly developed child will be born of ee of a 
high state of development. : ; 

Whether there is a continuous series of ‘nearnatione 
in the same sex, or whether a man in one incar- 
nation can be born as 2 woman in another . ; 

Whether very sinful people are ever born in animal 
bodies, as many Hindus are said to believe, to suffer 
for the actions of their past lives 

How to account for the statement in 7'he Light of Asia 
that Buddha was able to remember His incarnation 
in a tiger’s form . 

At what stage reincarnation finishes for an ego aad 


how . ; ‘ ; 
Interval peewaen lives, ie time that elapses between 
two incarnations of the same individual ‘ ‘ 
CHAPTER V 
KARMA 


Whether there is anything like fate or destiny ; the 


Law of Karma : ; : , : 
Two other explanations of human destiny: the Will 
of God ; the Result of Chance ; ; 
Third explanation of human destiny—the Law of 
Karma ..__. ‘ ‘ ‘ , , 
When Karma began : ; ; P ; 


How a man becomes master of his own destiny ; the 
three threads of the cord of fate : 

First thread of the cord of fate—how duought builds 
character : ‘ “ ; : 

Second thread of the eon of fate—how desire makes 
opportunities and attracts objects . ; : 


PAGE 


167 


168 


169 


171 


173 
174 
175 


180 
181 


181 
185 


186 
186 
187 


X1X 


Third thread of the cord of fate—how action ener 
physical environments 5 ‘ 

Whether the conceptiun of destiny controlled by the 
Law of Karma eliminates God from the world : 

Meaning of sin . : ; : ; : 

Forgiveness of sins , P : 

Whether repentance of sins igen any zed ; ? 


Whether karma can be transferred from one person 
to another—the idea underlying the Christian 


cloctrine of vicarious atonement : - 
Whether we are helpless slaves of destiny ; wheihée 
Karma is a doctrine of fatalism : : Z 
How a man is guided into his environments of nation- 
ality and family ‘ ; 
Whether the motive of a particalan sbi affects its 
result . ; ‘ : : : 


Why some persons with wabil motives yearning to 
help others find their way blocked either from want 
of power, defective capacity or lack of opportunity. 

Why a man has a ‘bad heredity’ or congenital 


diseases ; ‘ ; ‘ ‘ 
Necessity and freawill ' ; ; 
Whether astrology is true, and how it can be reuswetied 
with free-will ‘ ‘ 


How 2 man instead of being iybeated peti the bonds 
of karma allotted for one life, forges new links in 
the chain of karma . . ‘ ‘ ; 


If Someone injures us, how we can know whether it 
was the result of our own Prarabdha—karma allot- 
ted for our present life; actions done under the 
pressure of Prirabdha and those done by our own 
free-will ‘ ‘ ; ; 


Whether the pressure of karma allotted fon our present 
life makes us helpless slaves with no free-will of 
our own P ; : : . , 


Reason why a murderer should be hanged or a thief 
punished for theft even though there is pressure of 
Prirabdha in all actions and also though one is 
responsible simply for Kriyamina (new karma 
created) and not for the actual action done . : 


PAGE 
188 
190 
191 


192 
195 


197 
198 
199 


201 


209 


210 


How we can escape the effects of the two kinds of 
Prarabdha, the not-fixed and the fixed-not-fixed, 
though Dridha (fixed) Prarabdha is mapeonet to be 
unavoidable . ; j : 


Why exertion is advisable in “all cases, and how effort 
or exertion of free-will helps a man even when he 
is bound by Dridha (fixed) Prarabdha : 


Whether it will not be interfering with the justice of 
Karma if a man can alter Prarabdha oe the force of 
his free-will . ‘ . 


Why we should try to help the blind, the crippled or 
other deserving people in difficulty even when we 
may believe them to be suffering inevitably as a 
result of their karma. ; ‘ ; ‘ 


Whether pravers for averting sorrow or a 
happiness are useless. 


How a selfish man has to suffer in his ee life by 
Karma : ; : : ‘ ; 


How a bad man can ultimately become good even 
though a vicious man comes back in his next life 
more vicious than before ; ; ; ; 


Why a good man fails in business while a bad man 
succeeds 


Whether all our sufferings are the result of our oat 
karma : ; 

Whether the wrong we suffer is variably the effect 
of our own karma of a past life; reason of holy 
persons very often suffering in this ‘world ‘ 


Reason of accidents or seismic catastrophes wherein 
many suffer together ‘ ; ; ‘ 


Whether, in order to settle his kirmic accounts, a 
man will have to meet all those affected by his 
actions : ‘ . 


Whether the exact time and manner of a man’s jeath 
are decided at or before his birth . ; ; 


Karma among animals; reason why one animal is 
being kindly treated and well fed, while another is 
subjected to brutality and left to starve and fight for 
a bare living . ; : ‘ ‘ ; 


PAGE 


210 


211 


216 
917 
918 
218 


219 


220 


221 


222 


XX1 


How 3 man can mould his karma sacha and 80 
modify his destiny . ; ; 
How a man can cease generating new Sarna and 
exhaust all past karma in order to attain liberation. 
What binds the Masters to earth though They have no 
desires which can draw Them back; why They 
leave the indescribable bliss of Nirvana for the lower 
levels of the world of men . 


CHAPTER VI 
LIFE AFTER DEATH 


Advantages of the knowledge, during life, of the con- 
ditions on the other side of death; why a man 
should try to find out the facts for himself during 
life even though he may be able to do so after death. 

What becomes of 4 - man on the other side of death . 

How the real man ee himself from his elas 
vehicle. ° 

Whether a man sitters terribly déring his death- 
struggle ; 

What becomes of the separated ecicric ‘jouble after 
death . : ; ; ; 

Reasons why cremation is Sesterable to burial ; 

What becomes of the man in his desire-body after he 
has shaken off the etheric double and is separated 
from Prina . ; ° 

Desire-elemental and ati desde man. ‘ , 


Whether a man can prevent rearrangement of the 
desire-elemental after death, and, saving himself 
from being confined to the lower divisions one after 
another from below upwards, retain his liberty of 
seeing any astral sa of the matter of any sub- 
division ° 
State of an ordinary man in Kamaloka Gaimedintely 
after death ; 7 ; ‘ 


Surroundings of the astral world : : ; 
Whether there is any hell : : : ; 


PAGE 
224. 
229 


221 


228 
229 


230 
231 
232 
232 


230 
235 


237 


238 
242 
245 


XXil 


Conditions in Kamaloka of a very bad man, an ordinary 
man, and a man with some rational interests 

After-death conditions of those who die by accident 
or who have committed suicide 

Use of terrible suffering in the astral wor 1a even 
though there is no hell 

Explanation of the Christian doctrine sof! Salvation ? 
even though there is no hell . : ; : 

Factors which determine a man’s detention in any 
section of the astral world: time and method by 
which an ordinary man passes from the astral to 
the heaven-world ; ; 

Violent grief of those who mourn ie loss ‘oe their 
departed dear ones 

Value of prayers for the dead : how ae should if 
offered : : ; : é 

How and when to help a person about to die . 

Whether we shall meet our loved ones who have 
passed on before us . ; , ; ‘ 

Why a sudden death is andesirable for a man. : 

Astral world inhabited by others besides the dead 

Fate of the astral oe after the mau passess on to 
Devachan ‘ 

What happens to a man in Devachan or heaven 

Every one has not the same kind of heaven, or the 
same intensity of bliss there. F 

What happens to children in the heaven=world : 

How we find our friends and dear ones in the heaven- 
world . ‘ : 

Whether a dead man in heaven waits for and witches 
his friends and dear ones on earth . 
Opportunities of development for a soul during his 
long stay in Devachan between two incarnations 
Seven different heavens; whether a man passes 
through all these heavens successively as in the 
case of the astral plane ; ; 

What happens to a man in the higher mental world 
in his causal body at the end of his heavenclife in 
the lower mental world : ; : ; 


PAGE 

247 
250 
254 


209 
261 


262 
264 


207 


XX1ll 
CHAPTER VII 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 


What thought is ; how it shows itself . ‘ ; 

What the Scriptures of the different Soren eee 
say on the subject of thought. ; 

Effects of thought (i) Upon the man himself, i) 
External to the man . : ; 

Effects of thought upon the man himself : 

One of the two effects of thonght external to the 


man—a radiating vibration . : ; 
What an ordinary man’s astral body looks like when 
seen clairvoyantly . ‘ ‘ ‘ 
Second effect of thought outside of the man—a float- 
ing thought-form : : ‘ ; 
Classification of noushitorne: ; : ‘ ‘ 
How to use the knowledge of the action or effect of 
thought : ; ' ; ; 


How to forward our own evolution thro ugh a know- 
ledge of the power of thought 


How to keep our mind and emotions under soriteel ; 
How to build character by the power of thought ‘ 
How to avoid waste of energy. : ; : 
Other advantages of controlling the mind and 


emotions and husbanding energy . ; : 
What should be done by a man who has constantly 
failed to control his thought ur passions . . 
How to utilise the power of thought to help others. 
How to help one given to drink or irritability ; 


Prayers for the well-being of the living or of thedead . 
How to help by thought even when out of the 
physical body during sleep . ‘ : ; 
How to affect even physical matter by the power of 
thought ; effect of thought on physical health ‘ 


PAGE 
279 


280 


281 
281 


283 
286 


287 
290 


295 


295 
296 
298 
300 
301 


302 
303 


305 
306 
308 


XXIV 
CHAPTER VIII 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 


Meaning of the evolution of life ; , ; 
Motive power of evolution ; : : : 
Meaning of the Three Great Outpourings 


Reason why from the Perfect the imperfect comes 
forth and thence returns into perfection whence it 
came; goal and purpose of the evolution of life 

How the Divine Life in the first upward stage of 
evolution in the mineral, vegetable and animal 
kingdoms evolves in the ee life the Ponce to 
respond ‘ . 

Whether man is ‘ieeceniied fait the ite: as the 
Darwinian theory asserts . ; 

Whether each plant and each nha is a aSpatate 
soul like man . : ; : : ; 


Fate of animal or plant after death . 


Number of physical bodies attached to each eone 
soul ‘ 


Whether the evolving life Heaiis fei the joweeet 
manifestation in each a and ends with the 
highest 


Seven Rays or bandananial piss of life ‘ 
Method of individualisation from the animal 


kingdom : ; 
Difference between the highest anual and the lowest 
man , 
Method of Puna sedlution ; : 
Root-race and sub-race . , ; ; 
Chain of globes and scheme of aviation , . 
First stage of the unfolding consciousness in man 
from the early beginnings . ‘ ; ; 
Law of the four successive steps for orderly evolution 
in the later growth of humanity : : ‘ 
Origin and use of evil . ; ; : ; 


Meaning and use of pain : 


PAGE 
310 
313 
313 


319 


321 
323 


323 
324 


326 


XXV 


CHAPTER IX 
BROTHERHOOD 
Reason why ‘Brotherhood of Humanity’ is made 
the one obligatory ee of the Theosophical 
Society ; j 
How brotherhood of humane can be established ‘ 
Basis of the brotherhood of man ; reason why we do 
not realise it though recognising it intellectually . 
Where brotherhood can be fully realised ; ‘ 
Brotherhood and equality ; how brotherhood can exist 
with inequalities all round among men r 2 
No equality in the make-up of society . ; ‘ 
Conception of brotherhood in the social system ; 
Reason of inequality in different a and in 
different nations ; ; : 
Indications of the Law of the Brotherhood of fniianiee 
on lower planes in addition to the basis of pee 
unity on higher planes . ; 
Principle of brotherhood worked it in anion and 
modern worlds ‘ : ‘ 


Whether ancient India by ve ale of castes 
preached and _ practised Cee rather than 
brotherhood . : ‘ 


How the recognition of the seineiple of beStiechood 
as a definite fact affects our attitude towards those 


aroun us : , ‘: 
How to hasten the scaliaation of beciherhoea in 
practical life . : ‘< 


Our duty as brothers to fides aes us, thods on a 
level with us, and those below us in the prea sae 
of humanity . ‘ ; 

Special reason for emphasising Brotherhood in the 
Theosophical Society . ‘ ‘ ; ; 

Whether we are united only to the human family by 
ties of brotherhood . ; ‘ 

How to help our younger brethren in the lower kindoms 

Our individual duty as regards brotherhood in general 


PAGE 
357 
357 


358 
358 


359 
360 
360 


361 


362 
363 


363 


365 
366 


366 
367 
368 
370 


XXVI1 


CHAPTER X 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 


What is a Master , ; - ; ‘ 
How to show Masters as facts; evidence of Their 

existence , : ‘ ; 
The Great Brotherhood ; object of its acteinacs 


Some information about the Great Ones in the Hier- 
archy ; places where They live; Their personal 
appearances . : : ; ; : 

Reason why the Adepts, though having physical bodies 
of Their own, will want others on the occasion of 
the coming of the World-Teacher . ‘ : 

Work of the Masters. ; ; ‘ 

Why an Adept, even though His week lies almost 
entirely on higher planes, needs a physical body 

Reason why the Masters with so much power and wis- 
dom do not take more pupils ; why They withhold 
knowledge; why They do not remove crime and 
misery from the world 


Why the Masters with such spiritual powers permit 
the conquest and humiliation of Their countries 


like Egypt and India. ‘ ‘ . : 
Whether an ordinary man meeting a Master on the 
physical plane would recognise Him as such ‘ 
How 4 man is brought to the ee of the Path of 
spiritual development ‘ ‘ i 
How the Theosophical Society helps an aspirant in his 
approach to the Path . , ‘ ‘ 


How a householder, a man in the wal surrounded 
with social duties, family obligations and worldly 
activities, can lead a spiritual life and thereby pre- 
pare himself for the Path; his initial ai of 
purification . ; ‘ ; j 

The first step or the most important qualification 
necessary for approach to the Path; the mark 
whereby the man preparing to enter the Path can 
be known : : : : : ; 


PAGE 
372 


373 
375 


383 


415 
418 


421 


421 


423 
423 
424 


427 


429 


432 


XXVIII 


Difference between a man preparing to enter the Path 
and an ordinary man when both are engaged in the 
same kind of useful work in the world ‘ : 

Second step or gualification for approach to the Path . 

Meaning of being a pupil of the Master ; expectations 
from and work of one who aspires to becomea 
pupil . ‘ , : ; : 

Why the Masters do not use the many aspirants who 
earnestly desire to be taken as pupils and trained in 
order to help the world ; 

What we should do to attract the atiention of the 
Master : ; ‘ ; 

How a Master knows vieihien any person among the 
a of men in the whole of humanity is fit for 
the Path , ‘ : 

The way in which a man is led i seek the Muster. 


The two requirements from the probationary 
disiciple, 7.e., Discipline of Life and Qualifications 
for Discipleship ; meaning of the first requirement . 


The second requirement—gualifications demanded 
from an aspirant ere entrance to the Probationary 
Path : ; ; 

Object of the staye allied Bedbations ; new and why a 
man is taken first a8 a probationary pupil . ; 


Ordinary faults in everyday life which act as hin- 
drances to the progress of the probationary pupil . 
How the senior pupil guides the younger pupil in his 
progress : : ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 
Work to he accomplished by one who enters on the 


Probationary Path ; life of the ie in its early 
Stages . , ‘ " ; . 


Whether the Master gives to the ere pupil 
any special work to be done or any advice and 
instruction. ‘ ‘ ; , : 

What becomes of the pupil after he has acquired 
the Four Qualifications in the probationary stage ; 
period of that ctage and his relation to his Master 
during that and the other following stages . : 

Meaning and object of Initiation ; : ‘ 


PAGE 


433 
433 


434 


439 


439 
440) 


441 


443 
445 
447 


450 


451 


456 


459 
463 


CHAPTER I 
WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 


Question. Is Theosophy a religion ? 

Answer. Theosophy is not a religion in itself, but is the 
truth which underlies all religions alike, the hidden root 
from which all the different religions have sprung. It is 
the same as the Gnosis of the Christians, Brahma Vidya 
of the Hindus, and Sufism of the Muhammadans. “ Theos- 
ophy’”’ is made up of the two Greek words, Theos, a 
God, and Sophia, wisdom, and means Divine Wisdom, 
without the help of which it is impossible for man to know 
anything about the deeper and perennial problems of life. 

Q. What are those deeper problems of life ? 

Ans. Why was the universe created, whence, how; 
whither does it tend; what am I, what is the purpose of 
my existence, what the goal; what is God and where; how 
am I connected with Him and the universe; what is the 
explanation of the apparent injustices of life ; what is the 
meaning and the use of suffering and pain; what is luck, 
fate or destiny; what are dreams, and how are they 
caused ; what is life, what death—these and many such 
questions which the ignorant in all ages think to be 
inexplicable, can be understood only with the help of 
Theosophy. 


| THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Q. But ¢s st not the general belief that such things 
cannot be known by man ? 

Ans. There is nothing in the world which man cannot 
understand and know ; but the reason for his ignorance of 
such matters is his pride, mental inertia and undeveloped 
intellect. 

Q. But some ratse the objection that the matters not 
dealt with in their scriptures should not be considered as 
true. 

Ans. The fact that particular subjects are not dealt 
with in particular scriptures does not prove the falsity of 
those subjects, and so it is foolish to say that the study of 
Theosophical subjects, not found in particular religious 
scriptures, is against truth or against that religion. Asa 
matter of fact, most of the present-day sciences are not 
dealt with in religious scriptures ; would it, therefore, be 
right to say that they should not be studied ? 

Q. If Theosophy can explain the “inexplicable” 
mysterses of nature, how ts tt that so many people not 
only show a dislike to tt, but are positively against tt ? 

Ans. One reason is that though Theosophy, like a 
river, contains shallows in which a child can wade, there 
are depths in it which the strongest diver cannot fathom. 
Thus, though some of its teachings are so simple and 
practical that any person of average intelligence can 
understand and follow them, it is not a subject to be easily 
grasped or understood in its higher details without special 
efforts. Mental inertia hates being disturbed, and selfish- 
ness prefers an easy-going lie to the greatest truth, 
if the latter requires sacrifice of one’s smallest com- 
fort. Then again, the unselfish code of Theosophy 
can appeal only to the limited few who may be pre- 
pared to lead a life of great purity. One more reason 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 3 


is that Theosophy kills out superstition and bigotry 
masquerading as religion, and so when truths are present- 
ed which flatly contradict many of the human vagaries 
cherished by sectarians, they are not acceptable to those 
who have not made a deep study of their own religion and 
who naturally prefer to cling to their old beliefs. Such is 
human nature, and it is not easy to uproot long-cherished 
ideas, false though they be. Moreover, there is the un- 
familiar character of the Theosophic teachings, and a 
glance at the history of any new thought, religious or 
philosophic, will show that all possible impediments have 
always been put in its path by those who hate innovations. 

As a man makes intellectual progress, his ideas 
about religion undergo a great change, and his bigotry also 
is reduced in proportion. But bigots and fanatics of all 
religions who, inspite of their ignorance of even the ele- 
mentary principles of other religions, consider their own 
particular religion as the only true one and show contempt 
forall others, simply proclaim their own folly. Similarly, 
none of those who show a dislike to Theosophy and believe 
it to be against their own religion, is found to have truly 
understood his own religion or studied even the first 
principles of Theosophy. 

Q. Now, what are the fundamental principles of Theos- 
ophy ? 

Ans. There are two such principles. The first is the 
Immanence of God. God is everywhere and in everything. 
The divine Life is the spirit in everything that exists, from 
the atom to the Archangel. All thought, all consciousness 
are His, for He is the One, the Only, the eternal Life. 
Thus the essence of Theosophy is the fact that man being 
sharer of His life can know the Divinity and is himself 
divine and immorta', nay eternal; for immortality is only 


. THROGOPHY BXPLAIWED 


endless ‘time, and what in time begins, in time must end; 
while. man is eternal as God Himself is eternal, and death 
is merely the dropping of one garment before donning 
another. 

But if there be one Life, one Consciousness in all 
forms with God immanent in all, then as an inevitable 
corollary to this supreme truth comes the fact of the 
solidarity of all that lives, of all that is—a universal 
Brotherhood. The Immanence of God, the Solidarity of 
Man, these are the basic truths of Theosophy. 

Q. Can you give a rough outline of tts teachings ? 
Ans. Its teachings can be outlined thus: 


1. That there is one eternal Infinite Reality, one 
incognisable real Existence. 

z. That from That proceeds the manifested God, 
unfolding from unity to duality and from duality to trinity. 


3. That the whole universe with everything within 
it is a manifestation of the life of God. 


4. That there are many mighty intelligences called 
Archangels, Angels, Devas, who have come out of the 
manifested God, and are His agents for carrying out His 
thought and will. 


5S. That man like his Heavenly Father is divine 
in essence, his inner Self being eternal. 


6. That he develops and evolves by repeated in- 
carnations, into which he is drawn by desire under the law 
of Karma in the three worlds, the physical, the astral and 
the mental, and from which he is set free by knowledge 
and sacrifice, becoming divine in potency as hé had ever 
been divine in latency. 

7. That there are Masters, Perfected Men, Men 
who have completed Their human evolution, have attained 
human perfection and have nothing more to learn so far 
as our human state is concerned. 


What ts the relation of Theosophy to the Theo- 
sophical Society and when was the latter started ? 


WHAT THEOSOPHY 18 5 


Ans. Theosophy in its teachings and ethics, though not 
in name, is as old as man, but the word “ Theosophy ” is 
said to date from the third century A.D. when the Eclectic 
Theosophical System, which later on developed into Neo- 
Platonism, was started by Ammonius Saccfs and his dis- 
ciples in Alexandria, though Diogenes Laértius attributes 
that system to an Egyptian priest in the early days of the 
Ptolemaic dynasty. 

The Theosophical Society as such was founded by 
Madame H. P. Blavatsky and Colonel H. S. Olcott at 
New York, on 17th November, 1875 a.p. In the beginning 
people not only did not appreciate, but even opposed this 
really useful movement which is designed for the spiritual 
uplift of humanity. 

Q. But how can you prove the usefulness of Theosophy ? 

Ans. The usefulness of Theosophy lies in the true con- 
ception of the Plan of God, in the proper understanding 
of the purpose of life, in the sure confidence in Divine 
Justice, in the mental and emotional consolation, in the 
absolute freedom from helplessness and hopelessness, in 
the utter absence of fear and worry and in the opportunity 
of intelligent and willing co-operation with the Divine 
Plan and of quick attainment of the goal of human life. 
But the test of its usefulness lies in its adoption by sensible 
and intelligent people, in the consequent improvement of 
their conduct in daily life, and in its gradual permeation 
of world literature. The Theosophical Society, once 
started, went on expanding through its numerous 
branches in different parts of the world and still does 
so. No other system of thought whatsoever has made 
such rapid progress throughout the world amongst 
people of different religions during a period of less than 
fifty years, 


6 - THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


The growth in the number of branches belonging to 
the Theosophical Society since its birth, as shown in the 
following table, proves its usefulness. 


YEAR NUMBER OF BRANCHES 
1875 — es Sat I 
1880 aid ae sue II 
1885 ae ae sic 117 
1890 sa Ane see 234 
1895 oe fos ee 401 
1900 fen A ee 595 
1905 — bea oe 860 
1910 ies at ... «=: 5223 
1915 seg beg .. 1578 
1920 eet sais wee «=: 1923 
1924 saa oe ... 2364 


Again, every member of the Theosophical Society 
has friends and relations who have studied the Theo- 
sophical literature and are Theosophists without being 
members of the Society. 

Q. You sard Theosophy ts as old as man; then what 
was the need for the starting of the Theosophical 
Soctety ? 

Ans. The old truths had been forgotten and required 
re-proclamation. Materialism was making very rapid 
advances amongst the civilised nations of the West, and 
Science in its progress was drifting towards materialism, 
so much so that agnosticism was becoming the distinguish- 
ing characteristic of the scientific man who believed that 
beyond the senses and the intellect man was possessed of 
no instruments for the gaining of knowledge. Even the 
East, which used to be the fountain whence Wisdom 
sprung, was about to be swamped by the advancing wave 
of materialism which threatened to cover the world. And 
so it was thought wise to re-proclaim the eternal truth in 


WHAT THEOSOPHY 18 7 


a new form suited to the mind and attitude of the man of 
the time; but instead of revealing a new religion as so 
often before, the Theosophical Society proclaimed the 
common source of all religions, so that any man seeing 
that all religions are branches from a single tree and 
have the same teachings, may understand and derive 
inspiration from the inner, hidden meaning of his own 
particular faith. 

Q. Can everyone study Theosophy ? 

Ans. Of course any one can study Theosophy provided 
he has an open mind and an intelligently receptive attitude, 
and is eager in his search after truth wherever found, in 
whatever religion or philosophy. He should have neither 
the blind faith of the unintelligent and the biassed person, 
nor the blank and militant incredulity of the materialist. 
But Theosophy is not meant for those who prefer their 
own prejudices and preconceived ideas to truth revealed 
by others, nor for those bigots and fanatics who believing 
their own religion to be the only true one show the utmost 
contempt for other religions. 

QO. What is the advantage of the spread of Theosophy ? 

Ans. The Society has three objects, and tremendous 
would be the advantage if even one of those objects were 
really fulfilled. 

Q. What are those objects 7? 

Ans. The first and most important object ts “ to form 
a nucleus of the universal Brotherhood of Humanity, 
without distinction of race, creed, sex, caste or colour,” 
and acceptance of such a Universal Brotherhood is the only 
condition of admission into the Society. 

Q. How its tt posstble to have a unsversal brotherhood 
when persons of even the same religion quarrel amongst 
themselves ? 


8 . THEQSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Ans. If the second object be understood and followed, 
universal brotherhood is not impossible, and that second 
object is “ to encourage the study of comparative religion, 
philosophy and science ”. 

Q. Wherein lies the advantage then ? 

Ans. A study of comparative religion proves that the 
origin and essence of all religions are the same, and that 
fundamentally all religions are one, teaching the same 
truths and inculcating the same ideals of conduct and life. 

Q. How is that possible when the different world- 
religions apparently differ so widely ? 

Ans. The Immanence of God is the basis of Religion, 
and the various religions are methods by which man 
carries on his search after God—and here lies the justifica- 
tion for variety. There are many types of mind, and 
different religions were planned to appeal to different races 
and temperaments. 

Again, people are in different stages of evolution, 
and what suits one stage may not suit another. For 
example, a young or savage nation—that is, a nation 
whose people have not had much experience and 
training in a series of human incarnations, and whose 
chief pleasures are eating and drinking and hunting for 
food—would require a very simple kind of religion which 
would teach that there is a God who is good, that they 
should do right to please Him and gain happiness after 
death, but that if they did wrong, He would punish them 
and make them suffer after death. 

But when the same men have passed through many 
more earth-lives, and have been born into more civilised 
nations, they would require a higher and more spiritual 
form of religion as they would have greatly developed 
their intellectual and moral faculties. By the evolution of 


WHAT THEOSOPHY 1S 9 


humanity through ages their intellect would have grown 
stronger and their love wider and deeper, so that they would 
be able to understand more of the great truths than their 
forefathers were ever able todo. Again, what was suited 
to the needs of the people even two thousand years ago 
obviously cannot be fully suitable for them to-day with 
their wider knowledge of nature. 

The apparent differences between various religions 
are due to the national and racial characteristics and the 
varying stages of intellectual growth of the people con- 
cerned, as well as to the accretions of rites and ceremonies 
and the serious misrepresentations, distortions and wrong 
interpretations of basic truths taught by their Founders. 

Again, Truth may be expressed in a hundred 
different ways, but the whole can never be fully expressed. 
Men are now making the discovery that Truth is infinite 
while creeds are finite, that just as it is impossible to 
reduce the illimitable to a geographical atlas, so it is vain 
to endeavour to encompass the whole of truth in the most 
elastic confession of faith. But each religion has its own 
characteristic perfection or key-note, its message to man- 
kind, and the study of all religions is thus necessary to 
know the many-sided Truth. 

Thus following the second object one sees that no 
One particular religion is in sole possession of truth, and 
so one does not feel prejudiced against other religions. 
Hence brotherhood is more likely to be practically realised 
amongst all men, as it is already a fact in nature, all being 
children of the same Father. 

Q. You say that the essentials of all religtons are the 
same; how so? Moreover, if Truth ts found in all re- 
ligions, why does tt appear so dissimilar in different 
veligsons 7? 


ro THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Ans. All religions have grown round some great 
Teachers—in fact their very names are taken from those 
Founders—like Christianity, Buddhism, Zoroastrianism, 
Muhammadanism. The Founders of religions are all Divine 
Men under the World-Teacher, members of a Great 
Brotherhood who guide mankind and are in charge of a 
body of teachings, called the Ancient or Divine Wisdom. 
When a portion of mankind is ready for some new 
teaching, one of the Brotherhood is born amongst them to 
found a new religion, who ever brings with Him the same 
truths, the same teachings, but shapes the form of those 
teachings to suit the conditions of the time, such as the 
intellectual stage of the people to whom He comes, their 
type, their needs, their capacities. ‘Cows are many- 
coloured, but the milk (of all) has but one colour. Look 
on knowledge as the milk, and on the teachers as the 
cows.” Thus owing to the common divine origin, the 
essentials of all religions are the same, though the non- 
essentials vary. 

Religions are like vessels into which water is poured ; 
the water takes the shape of the vessels, but retains its 
fitness to quench thirst. So spiritual life is poured into 
religions, and takes shape according to the different 
religions—the needs of the time, the intellectual stage of 
the people concerned, etc.,—but remains one spiritual life 
all the same, able to quench the thirst of the spirit for the 
knowledge of God. 

As one white light includes all colours within itself, 
so the different religions represent the varied colours which 
in their union form the one white ray of Truth. As water 
in differently-coloured glass tumblers appears differently 
coloured though really colourless, as the same sun seen 
through differently-coloured glasses appears differently 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS tf 


coloured, similarly the same Truth appears different owing 
to the outer garbs of different religions, necessary for its 
expression, being differently coloured according to the 
needs and capacities of the different types of people for 
whom it is primarily intended. 

Each religion marks a step forward in civilisation and 
also brings out some feature valuable to mankind, on which 
less stress had been laid in the religions that preceded it. 
Mankind has to learn many lessons and develop different 
qualities which are given by special religions, adapted to 
emphasise particular teachings. These teachings are 
embodied in civilisations, and humanity, developing the 
qualities imparted by the civilisations and learning the 
necessary lessons taught by World-Teachers and incorpo- 
rated in religions, gradually shows an advance, with ever- 
enriched qualities. Thus, though all the great truths are to 
be found in each faith, there is also something in each faith 
which dominates the rest—its central idea or key-note— 
giving to it its own peculiar colour and evolving in it 
its own peculiar characteristics. 

Q. What are the central ideas, the key-notes, of the old 
religions so far known ? 

Ans. While it is true that every religion contains some 
universal teachings, each is dominated by a spirit peculiar 
to itself. Every religion has its own note, is marked by a 
dominant quality or seems to have selected one virtue or 
truth upon which to lay special stress; and all these notes 
do not sound out a monotone, but a splendid chord, when 
heard together. 

According to Dr. Miller, the well-known Presbyterian 
founder of the Christian College of Madras, the contribu- 
tion, as it were, of the Hindu religion to the great universal 
teligion, is the doctrine of the Immanence of God and the 


12 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Solidarity of Man. Admitting that the universal Life lives 
in all humanity, the brotherhood of man is only the earth- 
ward side of that great spiritual reality ; and growing out 
of that recognition of the unity of man is the dominant 
note of social obligations, of Duty, a sense of duty 
between members of a community, the duty of man to 
man. 

The teaching of the World-Teacher Tehuti or Thoth— 
or Hermes according to the Greek—which dominates the 
civilisation of Egypt is that of Science, the study of man 
and the worlds around him. And because its central 
teaching was of Light, Egypt had as the key-note of its 
faith Scientific Knowledge, so that the ‘‘ Wisdom of Egypt” 
has come down through the ages, and even the very name 
of Chemistry is derived from Chem or Khem, the old name 
of Egypt, the land of science in the past. Thus the 
contribution of Egypt to the world’s evolution is in the 
value of science and knowledge of the physical world 1.e., 
the doctrine of Law, for Law is the symbol of Knowledge 
as Duty is the flower of Truth. 

The basis of the civilisation which the World-Teacher 
built up in Persia as Zoroaster is Purity, “ purity of thought, 
purity of word, purity of deed”. He preached the doc- 
trine of Fire, and took Fire as the symbol of God, because 
fire is the great purifier. 

In Greece the Great Teacher as Orpheus gave the 
key-note of Beauty, the beauty which is divine; and 
Beauty is the note of the Greek religion and Greek 
civilisation, mighty among the older civilisations of the 
world. Greece worked the beautiful into the lives of her 
people, and that beauty spoke in her wondrous literature, 
in her exquisite architecture, in her statues open to the 
masses of the people. 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 13 


As Greece spoke of Beauty by Art, Rome spoke of 
Beauty by Law—the duty of the citizen to the community 
—for without Law, Beauty cannot be. Rome thought 
little of the individual; the State was the Roman ideal, 
and no true freedom for a nation can exist without the 
omnipotence of Law. 

The central idea of the great religion founded by 
the Lord Buddha in India was Knowledge—right know- 
ledge of wisdom, of compassion and obedience to law, of 
learning how to live and seeking in all things to understand. 

The note of the Hebrew religion is Righteousness— 
Righteousness of God, of “ the righteous Lord who loveth 
righteousness ”"’. 

In Christianity, the Faith on which has been built 
the civilisation of Christendom, two notes are struck, 
the one naturally following upon the other. The first 
is the key-note of Individualism. Older nations built 
their civilisations with the family as the unit and not 
the individual. Christianity struck the key-note of 
Individualism, and in order that it may be thoroughly 
developed, some of the doctrines including that of reincar- 
nation, taught in the primitive Church, were wisely 
dropped for about a thousand years. It was necessary to 
build the individual, and the idea of a single life gave the 
individual an activity which he would not have had if he 
had thought that many lives stretched before him and 
behind him. For the last two thousand years individual- 
ism has worked its way, until in the Teutonic sub-race, 
individual character has become extremely self-centred, 
full of ‘‘1I”-ness, of self-ness. This was perhaps neces- 
sary, for without this quality strongly built, there would 
be no foundation for a future co-operation. Truly has it 
been said: “‘ You cannot synthesise weaknesses.” 


14 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Then there is the idea, not so much by precept as 
by the exquisite example of the Founder, that when power 
has been gained, it is to be used for service, that when 
strength has been acquired, it is noble only when it is 
bound to the uplifting of the weak, that knowledge and 
power and strength are human only when they are vowed 
to the service of the race, that the greatest is to be as he 
that does serve and that the measure of his power is to be 
the measure of his duty. That sounded the note of Self- 
Sacrifice which in time will become the dominant note of 
the Christian nations. Thus Christianity links to love 
of God the service of one’s neighbour, and that has 
come from the lips of the World-Teacher in order that 
the human race may be able to step one rung further 
up the ladder of truth and of love. An English scien- 
tist, Huxley, catches up and proclaims the great word 
of a Master of Wisdom and Compassion that “the 
law of the survival of the fittest is the law of evolution 
for the brute, but the law of self-sacrifice is the law of 
evolution for man.’’ Self-sacrifice, the life-note of 
the Lord of Compassion, the Christ, could not be 
understood clearly even by His earnest followers until 
they had developed individual strength of mind and 
personality. The disciple Peter furnishes an instance 
of this in his denial of his Lord. With a larger under- 
standing comes the recognition of the duty of self- 
sacrifice, and individual duty begins to take the place of 
individual rights. 

Muhammadanism speaks of Resignation to the will 
of God, and states that there is but one path to God, 
which is through Resignation to the Divine Will. 

So looking over these religions of the world one 
finds that their central ideas are like the pieces ofa 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS rs 


great mosaic and need to be put together before one 
can see the grandeur of the full effect, that each faith 
has its own note of music, and one cannot afford to 
lose any of the dominant key-notes, any of the jewels 
of the different faiths, as all the religions of the world 
are the intellectual presentments of the one great spiritual 
verity, the different colours of the one white light of the 
spiritual Sun of Truth. 

We read in one of the Eastern scriptures, the 
Bhagavad-Gita of the Hindus: “ Mankind comes to Me 
along many roads, and on whatever road a man ap- 
proaches Me, on that road do I welcome him, for all 
roads are Mine.” That is a great truth. God is the 
centre, the religions are all on the circumference; and 
as all the radii lead to the centre, so all religions lead to 
God at last. What is wanted is that each one of us 
should deepen and spiritualise his own religion and see 
the essential identity of all religions, by an unbiassed study 
of comparative religion, assisted by the deeper truths and 
esoteric teachings of Theosophy. 

Q. After all, cannot Theosophy also be called a 
religion ? 

Ans. Theosophy ts the basis of all religions, though from 
a certain point of view we may think of it as a religion in 
itself, giving its followers a rule of life, not based on com- 
mands, but on plain common-sense proved by facts. Theos- 
ophists regulate their conduct in accordance with the 
Divine Will expressed in the laws of nature and avoid 
infringing them, not to escape the wrath of some imaginary 
offended deity, but to avoid bringing discomfort on 
themselves. 

It may be called a religion also because it shows us 
the ordinary course of evolution, and at the same time 


26 HEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


points out the short cut to the goal of human life through 

quicker progress by means of conscious effort. Further, 

as by a study of comparative religion Theosophy 

proves all religions to be identical in essence and origin, it 

can be called the key to all religions. It gives a common- 

sense explanation of matters considered as mere super- 
stition in religions. It has nothing to do with external 
ceremonies of any one religion, but is concerned only with 
the truth underlying them all. 

The members of the Society are not compelled to 
accept all the statements of Theosophy on blind faith, but 
are free to accept as much as appeals to them as true. 
That policy rests on a very sure foundation, the founda- 
tion that no man can really believe a truth, until he has 
grown to the extent which enables him to see it as truth 
for himself. A teaching is not really part of a man’s 
spiritual life ; it comes within the mental life, into that part 
of his nature which is said to be knowledge, the intellect ; 
and the intellect is able to see only that which is akin to 
itself. It is the truth in a man which recognises the truth 
outside him, when once the inner vision has been opened. 
Hence one object of the Theosophical Society is the study 
of the great fundamental truths of all religions. No one 
is asked what he believes in. All are left to study for them- 
selves. As soon as the eyes of the spirit open, a man at 
once recognises the truth, because the faculty of truth in 
his own nature tells him that it exists. He sees by it as 
he sees by the light of the sun. As long as a man is blind, 
the light of the sun is nothing to him; but for him who 
has eyes, no argument is necessary to prove the existence 
of the light by which he sees. Hence the motto which the 
Society has adopted: ‘There is no religion higher 
than Truth.” 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 17 


Q. Does the T.S. object to its members following any 
particular religton ? 

Ans. Certainly not. It has persons of all religions as 
its members. “ Pure thoughts, pure words, pure deeds ” 
being the sum total of all religions, he who practises these 
in one religion can be considered a follower of any other 
or all religions. 

Q. Are there any points of difference between Theos- 
ophy and what is ordinarily called a religion 7? 

Ans. There are two points of difference. The first. is 
that Theosophy does not demand blind faith from its 
followers. They are asked either to know a thing by 
experience, reasoning or intuition, or suspend judgment 
about it. As beginners naturally cannot know for them- 
selves, they are asked to accept as probable the statements 
made by experts till they can themselves verify them and 
convince themselves of their truth. 

The second point of difference is that Theosophy 
does not try to convert any man from the religion he holds 
and does not emphasise the superiority of one religion 
over others. On the contrary, it explains to him the inner 
and deeper meanings of statements and ceremonies of his 
own religion, arouses in him a deeper appreciation of his 
faith than what he possessed before he took up its study, 
teaches him to live his religion better than he did before, 
and in many cases gives him back, on a more intelligent 
basis and a higher level, the faith in it which he had all but 
lost. 

The cardinal policy of the Theosophical Society, 
maintained since its inception, has been that differences of 
religious belief are to be respected. Finding the same great 
truths as to life, death and conduct enshrined in all great 
religions, the Society seeks to work for all religions rather 


18 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


than for one. It believes that the existing faith of any 
particular country is, on the whole, best suited to its people, 
and it tries to strengthen and purify that faith rather than 
implant an alien faith in its stead. Thus it works in 
India for the revival and purification of Hinduism, in 
Ceylon for the cause of Buddhism, and in Europe and 
America for the true interpretation of the glorious religion 
of the Christ. As Mrs. Besant once pithily said about the 
Theosophical position, ‘‘ Theosophy asks you to live your 
religion, not to leave it.” 

Q. Now what is the third object of the Society ? 

Ans. It is ‘“‘to investigate the unexplained laws of 
nature and the powers latent in man’. Spiritual intuitions 
in man have to be kept alive, and bigotry in every form— 
religious, scientific or social—has to be opposed and 
counteracted. For this purpose we have to try to acquire 
a knowledge of all the laws of nature, 7.e., invariable 
sequences existing in nature, and especially encourage the 
study of those laws least understood by modern men—the 
so-called occult sciences—which are really based on a true 
knowledge of nature, not on superstitious beliefs. Again, 
man has within him certain latent powers which it is 
the object of the Society to investigate and develop, 
whereby suffering may cease and peace spread throughout 
the world. 

Q. But ts not Modern Sctence antagonistic to Theos- 
ophy 7? 

Ans. Theosophy or Divine Wisdom embraces all science, 
ancient and modern, as no knowledge can be outside 
Divine Wisdom. There is but one Science, so long as 
facts remain the same; what is strictly scientific is 
Theosophical, and what is truly Theosophical is entirely in 
harmony with all the facts, and so in the highest degree 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 19 


scientific. But the fundamental difference of view between 
Theosophy and Modern Science is that the one concerns 
itself with a study of Life and of Consciousness ; the other 
with a study of form and of the vehicles of Consciousness, 
with the physical phenomena of this and other worlds and 
with what can be brought into consciousness through the 
physical brain and senses alone. Modern Science is a 
systematised knowledge of sense-phenomena only, and many 
of its conclusions are erroneous as it hesitates to go beyond 
the senses even where physical phenomena like sleep and 
trance manifestations are concerned. “In old times 
Religion and Science were one, wedded together, and there 
was no discord between the Intelligence and the Spirit.” 
Modern Science in its self-sufficiency and materialism once 
derided Theosophy and was antagonistic, but materialism 
with its absurd theories is happily now a thing of the 
past, while opposition and disbelief have gradually 
subsided. 

No fair-minded or impartial student can study 
The Secret Doctrine—that masterpiece of Theosophical 
teachings—without being struck with admiration at the 
depth of knowledge it reveals, and without observing how 
Modern Science is advancing on lines traced and antici- 
pated by the gifted, though much-maligned, author of that 
monumental! work. 

Q. Then ts Theosophy a Science ? 

Ans. It is truly a_ science, because the truths it 
proclaims are matters not of mere theological belief but of 
direct knowledge acquired by study, investigation and 
painstaking observation. Being a Science of Life, a 
Science of the Soul, it teaches that the world is a 
manifestation of the Divine thought in all grades of matter 
interpenetrating one another. Man has got other bodies 


20 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


besides the physical, and when sufficiently evolved by 
repeated incarnations can unfold new senses, acquire 
higher powers of mind, observe the phenomena of nature 
in finer matter and understand the underlying laws. 

But in every science a student must be qualified to 
study and must have the necessary time and capacity if he 
wants to know at first hand. Similarly, a student of 
Theosophical science must have reached a certain stage 
in evolution and must have his physical, astral and mental 
bodies well purified to act as perfect instruments for 
research into the worlds of subtler matter. In fact 
Modern Theosophy is defined as a synthesis of the 
essential truths of religion, science and philosophy. 

Q. The depariments of religion and science have been 
explained, but what does Theosophy teach of philosophy ? 

Ans. “To reach the knowledge of the One is the aim 
of every philosophy,” said Bruno. Philosophy is the 
knowledge of Unity by the Reason, apart from the 
multiplicity of objects; Science is merely the observation 
of objects by means of the senses. Only he who knows 
the Unity is a philosopher. ‘Such a one,” said Plato, 
** T esteem as a God.” 

Theosophy is a philosophy of life and explains 
that the solar system is a magnificent manifestation of the 
Divine Life with man as a part of it. It states that man 
as seen by developed faculties is not a body having a soul, 
but ts a soul and kas a body—in fact several bodies, to 
act as vehicles in various worlds. There are several 
worlds interpenetrating one another and simultaneously 
present with us here all the time, though in our waking 
consciousness we are aware of only the lowest world, the 
physical. Man progresses life after life under the laws 
of Reincarnation and Karma till he realises the unity of 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 2I 


all that is, and reaches the knowledge of the One. He is 
the master of his own destiny, reaping in another life as he 
sows in one. It also explains that thought and feeling 
are not aggregations of matter, but are the causes of those 
aggregations, and declares with Sir William Crookes that 
we must see ¢” life the moulder and shaper of matter. 

Q. You have posited certain things about man and his 
evolution, about reincarnation and karma, about the 
existence of the Masters, etc. Are they facts that can be 
demonstrated ? 

Ans. AS a mathematician cannot demonstrate an 
abstruse theorem to a lad unless the latter has acquired by 
diligent study a knowledge of elementary mathematics, so 
a rigid training is necessary to perceive Theosophical 
teachings as facts. They are, however, laid down as facts 
by those who have verified them. Certain psychic faculties 
and spiritual powers, to be developed by training, are 
necessary before the facts of Theosophy can be demon- 
strated, though a complete verification of all facts is pos- 
sible only to Perfected Men. Yet before one develops 
psychic powers, one can see the necessity of reincarnation, 
karma, the pilgrimage of the soul, the Masters, etc., by the 
soul’s power of reasoning on the phenomena and experience 
of human life. 

Q. Is tt true that the members of your Society are all 
required to be vegetarians and teetotallers ? 

Ans. Nothing of the kind. Our Society merely expects 
all its members to try to serve other people and be kind 
and unselfish in their dealings with them. Its members 
should live the law of Brotherhood, the first object of the 
Society, and be tolerant to all religions. 

Q. Then why are many of your prominent members 
Strict vegetarians 7? 


22 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Ans. The study of Theosophical truths is not hindered 
by the use of flesh diet or alcoholic drinks. But really 
earnest students wish to do more than mere theoretical 
study. They want to study Occultism, the Secret Science 
which teaches the secret potency of things in Nature and 
develops the hidden powers latent in man. They want 
to acquire wisdom and power by occult study in order to 
help others, and to know the truth by direct personal 
experience and not to take it on trust. 

Now the first thing an aspirant learns is the true 
relation of the physical body to the inner man and the 
supreme importance of the latter over the physical sheath. 

Q. But how ss that knowledge concerned with vege- 
tarsanism 7 

Ans. The earnest student knows that the physical 
body must be maintained perfectly pure if a complete 
mastery over that body with its passions and desires is to 
be attained. 

Again, flesh diet not only affects the physical body 
for the worse, but also has a coarsening effect on the man 
himself. 

A modern scientist has shown that animal tissue, 
however cooked, retains marked characteristics of the 
animal to which it belongs; while occult science proves 
that when that flesh is assimilated by man as food, it im- 
parts to him some of the characteristics of the animal it 
comes from, coarsening and animalising the man. Such 
evil effects are greatest from the flesh of large animals, less 
from birds and fish and practically none from vegetables. 

Even amongst animals there is a deal of difference 
between the herbivorous and the carnivorous. The former 
like cows, goats, lambs, horses, parrots, doves, etc., have 
pure physical bodies which look clean and delicate, so that 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 23 


one is tempted to approach and caress them, while on the 
contrary the carnivorous animals like tigers, lions, foxes, 
rats, crows, etc., give out offensive smells and are always 
unclean. Flesh-eaters themselves, in the so-called civilised 
countries, do not eat carnivorous animals, because the flesh 
of those animals is very coarse and rank, and birds living 
on fish are avoided for the same reason. There is a differ- 
ence even in the natures of the herbivorous and carnivorous 
animals, the former being gentle, and the latter ferocious. 
Moreover, the animals really useful to man like horses, 
bullocks, cows, buffaloes, elephants, goats, lambs, etc., are 
practically all herbivorous, 


Besides this, a Theosophist 1s averse to causing pain 
to other creatures or injuring them, as he knows that the 
animal-world does not exist merely to satisfy man’s 
cravings, but has an evolution of its own. 

QO. Vegetarianism seems a beautiful theory, but ts tt 
practicable ? Cana man live without flesh diet ? 

Ans. The objection is founded upon ignorance. Thou- 
sands and millions live without flesh as food, and it isa 
pity that men and women, otherwise morally clean, 
should be taught that they cannot subsist without 
the corpse of a slaughtered animal as their necessary 
dietary. 

Q. But can you say that a vegetarian diet ts supersor 
to flesh food ? If so, please give reasons. 

Ans. Certainly. 

1. Vegetables have more nutrition than an equal 
amount of dead flesh. 


“It must be honestly admitted that weight by 
weight vegetable substances, when they are carefully 
selected, possess the most striking advantages over animal 
food in nutritive value. . . I should like to see the 


24 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


vegetarian and fruit-living plan brought into general use, 

and I believe it will be.” 
—SIR BENJAMIN W. RICHARDSON, M.D., F.R.C.S., 
‘Foods for Man—Animal and Vegetable—A Comparison.” 


There are four elements necessary for the repair 
and the upbuilding of the body: (1) Proteins or nitro- 
genous foods; (2) Carbo-hydrates ; (3) Hydrocarbons or 
fats; (4) Salts. These elements are found in a larger 
proportion in vegetable than in animal tissue. Nuts, peas, 
beans, milk and cheese have a large percentage of nitro- 
genous matter. Wheat, oats, rice and other grains, fruits 
and most of the vegetables are mainly carbo-hydrates, 
$.¢., starches and sugars. Nearly all the protein foods 
and vegetable oils furnish hydrocarbons or fats, while the 
valuable organic mineral elements of iron, potassium, lime, 
soda, etc., which serve as eliminators, antiseptics, blood- 
purifiers and producers of a kind of electro-magnetic 
energy, are mostly found in the plant kingdom, the main 
supply coming from fruit and vegetables. Meat contains 
an excessive amount of acid-forming elements and needs 
to be combined properly with foods rich in bases of 
mineral nature—milk, leafy vegetables and fruits. Fruits 
and vegetables, owing to their alkaline contents, also aid 
in establishing an alkali reserve in the blood which is 
essential to maintain its capacity to carry carbon dioxide 
to the lungs for elimination. 

But recently, since 1906, certain substances have 
been discovered in food-stuffs, in the absence of which an 
adequate number of calories (3,600 calories per day for an 
adult for ordinary mental and physical activities), supplied 
in the form of proteins, carbo-hydrates, fats—the three 
collectively being termed the “organic nutrients” —and 
the purifying and recuperative mineral salts, can alone 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 25 


neither promote growth nor support life indefinitely. Of 
these necessary dietary factors, called vitamins, six are 
already on the map of Science. Most malnutrition is due 
to absence of these vitamins, and their lack in diet causes 
the so-called “ deficiency diseases ”—Xerophthalmia, beri- 
beri, scurvy, rickets, pellagra, etc.—the diseases of malnu- 
trition or of dietary deficiency. 

Vegetables are the most important sources of 
vitamins in every-day diet—especially those that can be 
eaten raw—and the humble tomato, because of its wealth 
of the three main types of vitamins, is considered, along 
with lettuce, spinach and cabbage, one of the elect, one 
of “the big four” that head the vegetable kingdom. 
Vitamins. A and B are not appreciably affected by 
ordinary cooking methods, with the exception of frying, 
provided the vegetable liquor is saved; but the anti- 
scorbutic Vitamin C, found practically only in fruits, 
tomatoes and green leaf vegetables (and partly in fresh 
milk), and so essential in warding off scurvy and necessary 
for sound bone formation and healthy teeth, is very 
delicate and is rapidly destroyed when foods are dried, 
dehydrated, preserved or canned, and also under all 
processes of heating unless this latter is done under pres- 
sure, in absence of air and with a short period of heating. 

Milk, a ‘‘complete proteid food,” ts better than 
meat, not because its protein is superior to that of meat, 
but because it furnishes other valuable elements—vitamins 
and minerals. Thus a diet containing whole milk, fresh 
fruits like oranges, lemons or pineapples, vegetables— 
especially the leafy vegetables and salads—and bread and 
cereals—preferably whole wheat and other entire grain 
from which the outer covering has not been rernoved— 


with butter, will be an ideal one, being rich in all the 
4 


26 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


vitamins. Fruits and those vegetables which can be eaten 
raw have a special and very important role in nutrition as 
carriers of anti-scorbutic substances. Fruits and vege- 
tables also have great value as correctives of faulty 
elimination, whether taken raw or cooked. 

2. It causes less disease. 

Flesh is affected to an enormous extent with 
terrible diseases like cancer, consumption, intestinal 
worms, etc., which are readily communicated to man. In 
his fifth report to the Privy Council in England we find 
Professor Gamgee Stating that ‘one-fifth of the total 
amount of meat consumed in England is derived from 
animals killed in a state of malignant disease,” while there 
is hardly a disease transmitted by vegetables. 

A very large number of medical men who are 
progressive and who have studied the matter of “ Diet 
in relation to health,” forbid their patients to eat any 
flesh—not only as a means of alleviating such ailments as 
Gout, Rheumatism, etc., but also as a preventive of uric- 
acid maladies and diseases of many kinds, including 
Cancer, Appendicitis and Tuberculosis. Wounds heal 
more quickly and fever is less readily caught—and if 
caught, more readily cured—among people who do not 
eat animal corpses. 


‘¢‘The man who suffers from Gout, or Rheuma- 
tism is sick because he daily swallows these maladies at 
the dinner-table, possibly at every meal he eats. As long 
as a man keeps on eating Gout, in the shape of juicy 
beefsteaks and mutton chops, etc., he must expect to have 
painful twinges in his toes. 

‘‘Eminent French and English physicians have, 
in recent years, shown that a large share of the maladies 
from which human beings suffer are due to uric acid. 

“Dr. Haig, the eminent English physician, has 
shown that most uric acid diseases are due not only to the 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 27 


failure of the body to destroy or eliminate its uric acid, 
but to the introduction of uric acid with food. The 
following are a few of the startling facts which these 
investigators have brought to light. 


“A pound of beefsteak contains fourteen grains 
of uric acid, 

“A pound of liver contains nineteen grains of 
uric acid. 


“A pound of sweetbread contains seventy grains 
of uric acid. 

“The following list of maladies due to uric acid 
are copied from Dr. Haig’s great work entitled ‘ Uric Acid 
and Causation of Disease ’:—-Gout, rheumatism, headache, 
epilepsy, convulsions, chorea, hysteria, neurasthenia, ner- 
vousness, mental depression, lethargy, vertigo, syncope, 
insomnia, paralysis, asthma, dyspepsia, congestion of the 
liver, glycosuria, diabetes, Bright’s disease, albuminuria, 
dropsy, gravel, and calculus, neuritis, retinitis, cerebral 
and spinal degeneration, local inflammations of all kinds, 
appendicitis. 

‘“‘The above maladies are due to eating uric acid 
and it is evident they cannot be cured while a person 
continues to eat the uric acid by which they are produced. 


“A person’s liver and kidneys may be able to des- 
troy and eliminate the uric acid produced in his own body, 
while not at all prepared to deal with five, ten or twenty 
times the quantity.” 


J. H. KELLOGG, M.D., 
Medical Superintendent of the Battle Creek Sanitarium, Michigan. 


‘‘ To-day, there is the scientific fact assured—that 
Man belongs not to the flesh-eaters, but to the fruit- 
eaters. To-day, there is the chemical fact in the hands 
of all, which none can gainsay, that the products of the 
vegetable kingdom contain all that is necessary for the 
fullest sustenance of human life. 

‘‘Flesh is an unnatural food, and, therefore, tends 
to create functional disturbance. As it is taken in modern 
civilisation it is affected with such terrible diseases (readily 
communicable to man), as Cancer, Consumption, Fever, 
intestinal worms, etc., to an enormous extent. There is 


28 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


little need for wonder that flesh-eating is one of the 
most serious causes of the diseases that carry off ninety- 
nine out of every hundred people that are born.” 
JOSIAH OLDFIELD, D.C.L., M.A., M.R.C.S, L.R.C.P., 
Senior Physician, Lady Margaret Hospital, Bromley. 
“ Seventy-five per cent. of the most terrible dis- 
eases under which we suffer (they are not, in fact, diseases 
at all, but poisonings by unnatural foods), our increasing 
insanity, our increasing cancer, our debility, and our 
deterioration, may be due, not improbably, to the neglect 
of Nature’s teaching. And Nature says, in a way that 
there is no misunderstanding, that Man is a frugivorous 
and not a carnivorous animal.” 
ALEXANDER HAIG, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P (1906). 


3. It is more natural to man whose teeth have 
not the slightest resemblance to those of carnivorous 
animals, and whose alimentary canal seems better adapted 
for vegetarian than for meat diet. 


“Man is a frugivorous animal, and neither his 
internal organs, his teeth, nor his external appearance, 
resemble in any way those of carnivorous animals.” 


“The body of Man and that of the anthropoids are 
not only peculiarly similar,” says Haeckel, “but they 
are practically one and the same in every important 
respect. The same 200 bones in the same order and 
structure, make up our inner skeleton; the same 300 
muscles affect our movements; the same hair clothes our 
skins ; the same four-chambered heart is the central pulso- 
meter in our circulation; the same 32 teeth are set in 
the same order in our jaws; the same salivary, hepatic 
and gastric glands compass our digestion; the same 
reproductive organs ensure the maintenance of our race.” 

PROFESSOR J. HOWARD Moore, 
(Chicago University), “ The Universal Kinship.” 
‘*Man resembles no carnivorous animal. There 
IS no exception, unless Man be one, to the rule of herbi- 
vorous animals having cellulated colons. The orang- 
outang perfectly resembles Man both in the order and in 
the number of his teeth. 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 29 


“ The orang-outang is the most anthropomorphic 
(man-like) of the ape tribe, all of whom are strictl 
frugivorous. There is no other species of animals which 
live on different foods in which this analogy exists.” 


PROFESSOR BARON CUVIER, 
“‘ Lecon d’Anatomie Comparative.” 


4. It gives greater strength. 

Flesh-eaters boast of their vigour of body, but 
they have not the endurance of vegetarians. The former 
may do a large amount of work for a short time when 
well-fed, but soon get hungry and weak, while the latter 
can endure long periods of work under the most trying 
conditions. 


‘‘A series of experiments were made at Yale 
University by Prof. Irving Fisher, in 1906 and 1907, to 
test the relative endurance of flesh-eaters and flesh- 
abstainers. Forty-nine subjects were used, the flesh-eating 
ones being athletes, and much care was used to obtain 
exact evidence, with the following results :— 


In the contest of holding the arm extended, the 
maximum limit of the flesh-eaters (22 minutes) was barely 
more than half the average of the abstainers, one of whom 
held out for 160 minutes, another 176, and yet another 200 
minutes. 


In deep bending of the knee the average of the 
flesh-eaters was 383 times, and that of the abstainers 
731 times. 


Similar experiments made at Brussels University at 
about the same time revealed the same facts, and demon- 
strated an average superiority of 50 per cent. in labour and 
endurance capacity in favour of the vegetarians. And the 
dynamograph recorded that in the case of the latter only 
one-fifth of the time was necessary for recovery from 
fatigue as compared with the time required by the 
flesh-eaters.”’ 


Charles Darwin wrote, ‘I have always been 
astonished at the fact that the most extraordinary workers 
I ever saw, the labourers in the mines of Chili, live 


30 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


exclusively on vegetable food, including many seeds of 
leguminous plants.” 
| (DARWIN’S LETTERS) 


‘Meat is absolutely unnecessary for a perfectly 
healthy existence, and the best work can be done ona 
vegetarian diet. . . . It is being realized that every 
means should be resorted to so as to prevent the accession 
of disease rather than merely attempt to cure it when it 
comes, and the Vegetarian Movement will, I think, do a 
very great deal towards this.”’ 

Pror. G. Sims WOODHEAD, M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.S., 

Professor of Pathology, Cambridge University. 


“That it is easily possible to sustain life on the 
products of the vegetable kingdom needs no demonstration 
for physiologists, even if a majority of the human race 
were not constantly engaged in demonstrating it, and my 
researches show not only that it is possible, but that it is 
infinitely preferable in every way, and produces superior 
powers both of mind and body.” 


ALEX. HAIG, M.D., F.R.C.P., 
“ Uric Acid in the Causation of Disease.” 


“As a medical man I desire to add my’ testimony 
both from the results of personal experience, and from 
observations throughout many years of hospital and 
private practice. I maintain that flesh-eating is unneces- 
sary, unnatural and unwholesome. 


‘That it is not necessary for the highest develop- 
ment of mind and body is proved by the phenomenal 
success achieved by vegetarian athletes, and by the numer- 
ous instances of celebrated philosophers, writers, and 
scholars, both ancient and modern, known vegetarians. 


‘“ The habit is unnatural, for it is a violation of the 
Law of our being. Man is created a frugivorous, or fruit- 
eating creature. This scientific fact is evident froma 
comparison with the carnivorous animals, from whom he 
differs completely in respect of his internal organs, teeth 
and external appearances; whereas, anatomically, he is 
most intimately allied to the anthropoid apes, whose diet 
consists of fruits, cereals, and nuts. 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 3Y 


“ That the eating of the dead bodies of slaughtered 
animals is snwholesome is abundantly evident from the 
wide-spread disease which results.” 


JoHN Woop, M.D. (Oxon). 


5. It produces less animal passion. 

Flesh diet intensifies man’s lower nature and 
produces a craving for strong drink, which in turn increases 
animal passions. 

As a practical proof of the superiority of a vegetable 
diet over flesh-food the following instance is quoted : 


‘‘ For six months during 1908, 10,000 children in 
London were provided with vegetarian meals by Miss 
F.I. Nicholson, Secretary of the London Vegetarian 
Association, and at another kitchen provided by the 
London County Council a meat diet was provided 
for the same number of children; at the end of six 
months the children of both parties were examined by 
medical men, and it was proved that the vegetarian child- 
ren were better in health, heavier in weight, firmer in muscle, 
and clearer of skin than the children fed on meat diet. 


“Many thousands of the poorest children of London 
are now fed on vegetarian diet by the London Vegetarian 
Association under the superintendence of the London 
County Council, and at their request.”’ 


Then there is the question of cruelty to animals, the 
sin of slaughter and the degradation of the slaughterman. 
He who feeds upon dead flesh encourages that work and 
has his share in that horrible guilt. 

Thus we can understand how unclean flesh-eaters 
must be inspite of their external wash of the body and 
their scented clothes. 

Q. If you do not consider mere washing of the body 
and putting on of clean clothes as cleanliness, what would 
you call real purity ? 

Ans, Of course external wash and clean clothes are 
necessary, but these things alone do not constitute purity. 


32 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


The physical body of man is only one of his seven constitu- 
ents, while the skin of the body is not even the hundredth 
part of that body; then how little can the whole body, 
‘much less the whole man, be considered clean by simply 
washing the skin? That body alone can be called pure, 
the whole of which, including blood, muscles, bones, etc., is 
composed of pure particles. But if it be made a grave- 
yard. by introducing corpses of dead animals into it, it can 
never be really clean. 

“The lamp burns bright when wick and oil are 
clean.” Flesh-food makes the physical body a worse 
instrument, and puts difficulties in the way of the soul by 
intensifying undesirable passions and emotions. 

It is true that the purity of the heart and of the 
soul is more important to a man than that of the body. 
Yet that is surely no reason why we should not have both. 
There are quite enough difficulties in the way of self- 
control, and we need not go out of our way to add another 
to the list. Although a pure heart will do more for us 
than a pure body, yet the latter can certainly do a great 
deal, and we are none of us so far advanced along the road 
towards spirituality that we can afford to neglect the great 
advantage that it gives us. 

Q. If, according to modern theories, everything ts 
living, why may we not as well eat animals as vegetables ? 
Ans. For the obvious reason that animals have a very 


Sensitive nervous system, and vegetables have not. And 
would not the cannibal, if he could, add man to the list 
and pertinently ask a similar question: ‘‘ Why may we 
not as well eat men as animals and vegetables ?’’ The life 
in the tree is not sufficiently unfolded to be conscious of 
pleasure or pain, except in a very general way; a vague 
pleasure is felt in sunlight and rain; a vague pain in 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 33 


drought. The vegetarian takes living things as his food 
just as does the flesh-eater, for all things live; but he 
chooses the living things which do not suffer pain in being 
used as food. So also, though we constantly breathe in 
myriads of living creatures, they are none the worse for 
their sojourn in our lungs. 

Q. But we see in nature that bigger snimals leve on 
smaller ones, big fish on small fish ; then wheretn lies the 
objection tf man, too, follows that rule and lives on animal 
flesh ? 

Ans. You cannot apply the laws of animal nature to 
man. Though a strong animal kills a weaker one and 
makes it its food, you cannot accuse it of murder, but a 
man following a similar course will render himself liable 
to punishment. Similarly, a dog or a cat eating its own 
young ones does not commit sin nor is it punished. The 
responsibility of good or evil is proportionate to intel- 
lectual and moral development, and so animal laws cannot 
apply to man. 

Q. But many of our ancestors lived on meat all thetr 
lives and were no worse ; then why should we try to improve 
on them ? Does not nature intend man to be carnivorous ? 

Ans. There are man-eating savages even now in some 
parts of the world, and they may with equal force bring 
forward the same argument, inasmuch as the flesh of man 
seems so delicious and natural a diet tothem. Some 

people eat crickets, rats and other insects and animals 

which look to us so loathsome. Similarly, the devouring 

of dead flesh, though natural and pleasant to some, seems 

to others disgusting and opposed to the law of mercy. 
As seen before, the scientific world is being more 

and more convinced of the fact that “ man belongs not to 

the flesh-eaters, but to the fruit-eaters,’’ though the human 
5 


34 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


alimentary system seems so adapted as to enable man to 
live either on flesh or vegetable food whatever be provided 
for it. But even if we cannot lay it down that nature 
intends man to be either carnivorous or frugivorous, it 
seems that he is intended to make changes in his customs 
and habits as he advances in intellect and spirituality 
and understands the distinction between right and wrong. 
A wrong thing does not cease to be wrong because many 
do it. Man is defined as a thinking animal, and he should 
not give up his right of independent judgment, but should 
apply the test of common sense to all affairs of life. A 
habit or custom proved by increase of knowledge and 
experience to be wrong or pernicious is a bar to higher life 
and detrimental to human progress. 

Not only does flesh diet make the physical body a 
worse instrument for man, but the man by thus introducing 
loathsome impurities into it builds for himself a coarse 
and unclean astral body also with strong animal passions. 
As he has to live the first part of his life after death in that 
astral body, it follows that he will have to suffer acutely 
from the working out of those passions. 

So instead of feeding on flesh merely because our 
forefathers did it, we should consider it our duty to live on 
vegetarian diet when knowledge and common-sense prove 
it to be purer, healthier and better suited to man. 

Again, man’s body is a temple of God, and should 
not be made a graveyard. None of the occultists, proph- 
ets or other light-bringers has ever lived on this disgust- 
ing diet or commended its use as food. Amongst the 
thousands of reliable witnesses to the sufficiency and 
superiority of fruitarian diet are to be found the following 
well-known names :—Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Socra- 

tes, Hypatia, Iamblichus, Diogenes, Plutarch, Seneca, 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 35 


Buddha, Zoroaster, the Christian Apostles—James, 
Matthew, James the Less and Peter—the Christian 
Fathers—Tertullian, Origen, Chrysostom, Clement and 
others—Milton, Isaac Newton, Benjamin Franklin, Nelson, 
Wellington, Shelley, Paley, Wesley, Swedenborg, Newman, 
Michelet, Annie Besant, Bernard Shaw, Edison, General 
William Booth and W. Bramwell Booth. 

Q. But tt ts said that those who give up meat-cating 
grow sll and have again to resume that diet. Why ts st 
so, and what should they do ? 

Ans. Not only has each one of us his own individual 
consciousness as “I,” but each atom, each molecule, each 
cell in our body, has its own individual consciousness. 
The “I” in us is conscious of the body as a whole, but 
not of the cells individually. Similarly, the cells have no 
consciousness of the dweller in the body. Now if these 
cells be trained along a particular line or be given a par- 
ticular habit or tendency, they go on acting accordingly till 
actively prevented. This is due to what is called the 
“unconscious memory of the cells,” and so if the cells of 
the whole body are given a particular tendency, that be- 
comes a habit with them. Physical tricks of manner are 
formed in this way and are difficult to get rid of when 
once acquired. Similarly, a child trying to learn to write 
will have the same trouble either with the right or with 
the left hand, but when once it has learnt to do so with 
either hand, that hand starts writing as soon as the pen is 
held, which cannot be said of the other hand which has 
not got that tendency. Thus the difficulty of breaking 
the meat habit is easily explained. When foolish parents 
thrust morsels of that detestable stuff into the mouths of 
children, the children first show a natural dislike, but when 
the cells of the body are regularly taught to obtain 


36 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


nutrition from such matter, they get a tendency along that 
line, acquire the habit and demand the same impure stuff. 
When children thus brought up later on find out their 
mistake and want to give up flesh diet, they are put to 
great trouble, as the cells of the body habituated to that 
evil tendency revolt against the change, and the physical 
body sometimes even breaks down under the stress of 
the unsatisfied cravings. 

But that does not mean that flesh diet is necessary. 
When by persistence or repeated efforts those cells become 
habituated to vegetarian diet, they leave off their old evil 
tendency and get accustomed to the new diet, until the 
man, who was once heartily fond of flesh food, now not 
only shrinks from the very smell of it, but comes to enjoy 
a vegetarian diet even more heartily. Also, in many cases 
people who become vegetarians suddenly, find a marked 
improvement in their health. 

“ T have seen children of all ages who have been 
accustomed to eating meat, and who have suddenly come 
under conditions where no flesh-food was given. I have seen 
young men and middle-aged men, some of whom had been 
abstemious livers, and some of whom had been luxurious 


bons vivants, and who immediately and entirely gave up 
meat altogether and all with the happiest results. 


‘I have had under my observation those who for 
60 to 7o (and in one case for 75) years had lived on the 
ordinary dietary, and who at a single stroke had all meats 
and meat extracts and gravies cut off, and in not a single 
instance could I say that I ever saw any injurious result 
following, whereas in the majority of cases I noticed an 
improved vigour, while a sense of lightness and freedom 
was experienced, just as if some weight or burden had 
been removed from the vitals. 


“If I am asked ‘ Did these people who gave up 
eating meat lose tone or become weaker?’ my answer 
would be that in the majority of cases they confidently 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 37 


stated that they found themselves stronger and more 
powerful in body, and clearer and more vigorous in mind.”’ 


Jos1AH OLDFIELD, D.C.L., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., 
Senior Physician of the Lady Margaret Fruitarian Hospital, Bromley. 


The sate way, however, to change over from meat 
eating to a meatless diet is to cease from it gradually. 
One should first drop pork in every way, shape and form. 
A heavy meat eater, one who eats meat three times a day, 
should eat it only twice a day for a fortnight ; thence once 
a day for a fortnight, then once a day every other day for 
a fortnight, then twice a week for a fortnight, then once 
a week for the same length of time, and then drop it. 

Sometimes people when they begin to be vegetarians 
misunderstand the whole business. As meat is gradually 
eliminated, what is to take its place? Most people com- 
mence at once to eat an increased quantity of bread, 
porridge, cakes, pies, and everything containing sugar. 
With the loss of the meat stimulation comes a craving for 
something to take its place. Tea, coffee and sugar seem 
to meet the demand to a nicety, and they are indulged in. 
The body commences to pile on fat, often there is illness, 
in almost every case there is digestive disturbance more or 
less serious, the results of which do not appear for a long 
time. Again, the idea of some English people who have 
been living principally on meat with cabbage and potatoes 
is to give up meat and live on cabbage and potatoes. 
Now potatoes being all starch, and cabbage mostly water, 
they could not live on starch and water, but must have 
other flesh-forming foods. Recent books on the subject 
of diet tell us what amount and what proportion of differ- 
ent kinds of food are needed, how much of the flesh- 
forming, bone-forming and blood-forming foods are 
necessary, carbohydrates, proteins, etc. They also give 


38 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


long lists of foods, though only some of them may suit 
particular bodies, and a person wishing to live on vege- 
tarian diet should find by trial what would suit him best. 
If he finds some difficulty with his digestive organs, he is 
taking the wrong kind of food. He should try other 
things and unless he is hopelessly diseased, he will always 
find a way out. Uncooked vegetables and fruits are 
recommended. The utmost care should be taken to avoid 
any increased consumption of starchy foods, sugar, tea 
or coffee. Salads of uncooked vegetables should take 
the place of the missing meat, and uncooked fruits 
should be eaten freely. Whole meal bread only should 
be used. 

Q. If a man be suffering from a fatal disease ora 
chronic sliness, and the only remedy is flesh food, may tt 
not be taken under medical orders ? 

Ans. The question is based on an unlikely or impossible 
assumption. It is hke asking: “ If a square were round, 
how many corners would it have?’’ There is no illness for 
which the eating of flesh is the only remedy. In fact, 
flesh diet is never meant as a remedy for any illness. The 
giving of flesh in serious cases by European doctors is 
generally a sign that the patient is beginning to recover. 
Even if such a case as is assumed in the question be at all 
possible, the person concerned should take into consider- 
ation his duty and his position in spiritual evolution. A 
Sanydsi or a spiritually evolved soul might let his body 
die under such conditions, whereas an ordinary man of the 
world would wish to preserve it. 

In case of a serious or chronic disease, with medical 
advice to take meat, the patient should change his doctor 
instead of his diet. Doctors differ as much as laymen, 
and we should choose a doctor whose opinions on these 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 39 


matters do not clash with our own. Many prominent 
doctors all over the world have come to the conclusion 
that meat-eating is at the root of most diseases, and 
are substituting for it a non-meat diet. As stated before, 
meat produces great quantities of uric acid, and this causes 
consumption, gout, and many other serious diseases. 

Q. Then you also eschew wines and narcotics ? 

Ans. Alcohol in any form has a directly pernicious 
effect on certain centres in the brain and does a man more 
harm than even meat, as it hinders the development of his 
inner powers and stunts his moral and spiritual growth. 
All narcotic drugs are similarly injurious, though less so 


than wines or spirits. 

Q. Is st true that your rules require the members to 
vemain unmarried 7? 

Ans. We require nothing of the kind as there is perfect 
individual freedom of opinion and action in our Society. 
Moreover, only very few can have complete control over 
their passions, and discouragement of marriage means 
increase of immorality. 

Again, a married man has to look after and 
maintain his family, whereby the quality of unselfish love 
is developed within him life after life, so much so that 
later on he learns to labour for and love the whole world. 
On the contrary, he who refrains from marriage is ordina- 
rily wholly absorbed in self-interest, and is consequently 
likely to develop the base quality of selfishness; so a 
married life is advisable for all ordinary men who, though 
earnest and ardent workers for Theosophy, have still 
ties binding them to the world. But for him who 
has for ever done with worldly life, who desires only to 
know truth in order to help others and who is 
most earnest to gain his end, celibacy is generally 


40 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


advisable, because just as one cannot serve two masters, 
it is impossible for such a man both to pursue occultism 
and lead a worldly life. If he tried to do this, he would 
fail in doing either properly. Hence celibacy is desirable 
and even necessary for the few who are determined to 
tread the path which leads to the highest goal. Marriage 
is also incompatible with some special forms of Yoga—the 
systems which seek an expansion of self-consciousness 
above the physical state—and men and women who want 
to practise those must become celibates. On the other 
hand, there are cases in which marriage is necessary to 
provide bodies for certain types of soul or to perpetuate 
some useful race or family. Moreover, if occultists 
were married to occultists, they would help rather than 
hinder one another. 

Q. We find more misery than happiness tn the world ; 
then why should we waste our time and energy in the 
study of Theosophy instead of utilising them for new 
researches and inventions which may alleviate a little of 
the great misery of the world ? 

Ans. All the ‘pain and misery in the world can be 
classed under three heads: 1. Adhydtmic, 2. Adhibhautic 
3. Adhidatuic. 

The first includes all pains of body and mind; 
the second all pains and miseries caused by theft, by the 
ravages of tigers and other wild animals, by bite of 
serpents and poisonous insects as well as by accident or 
breach of trust; while all kinds of unhappiness brought 
about by natural causes such as the sun, electricity, 
earth-quake, cold, heat, wind, rain, etc., are included in 
the third. 

All the miseries in the world fall under one or 
other of these three classes. Now if we take the first 


WHAT THEOSOPHY 1S 41 


class, vtz., the afflictions of body and mind, we find that 
in spite of thousands coming out as medical men and 
inventing new specific cures for all diseases to which flesh 
is heir, we have not yet been able to exterminate bodily 
suffering. Even if the whole of humanity turn its atten- 
tion to medical science, we cannot abolish all bodily and 
mental diseases, because some of them are congenital, like 
congenital insanity or congenital blindness or deafness or 
lameness, and no physician can ever cure these. 

Coming to the pains of mind, non-acquisition of a 
thing desired, contact with undesirable objects, loss of a 
desired object or of a friend or a dear one by death, are 
some of the causes that produce such pains, and what 
power have we to overcome them? Even supposing that 
all pains and afflictions mentioned under the first heading 
are guarded against or removed, what security can we 
have against pains and miseries caused by the other two 
sources, t.¢., by wild animals or poisonous insects, by theft 
or breach of trust, by sunstroke or lightning, by scarcity 
of rain and consequent famine, etc. ? 

Q. How, then, can we rid the world of all kinds of 
pains, miseries and diseases ? 

Ans. There is only one remedy and that 1s knowledge. 

Q. But how can we guard agatnst and prevent bodily 
disease, snake-bste, sun-stroke, accsdental death, congens- 
tal disease, etc., simply by knowledge ? 

Ans. It is clear that to cure a disease after getting it is 
something like trying to extinguish a fire after it has 
started, and just as the fire is bound to do some damage 
however quickly it may be put out, diseases once contract- 
ed are bound to give some pain however quickly they 
are cured. Again, we have no power to prevent the 
recurrence of diseases. Just as by eating, hunger is only 

6 


42 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


temporarily satisfied, and is felt over again after a time, 
so nearly all the present-day cures are meant for diseases 
after they have come and are in no way preventives or 
remedies against their invasions. 

Till we know the root-cause of all the pains and 
miseries of the world, we cannot put an end to them; 
our time is taken up merely in fighting the diseases after 
they have started. This does not imply that the treatment 
of diseases is useless. On the contrary, it is as necessary 
to treat a disease as it is to put out a conflagration. But 
rather than be continually putting out a fire in a haystack 
started by a child playing about with a match-box, it is 
better to remove the cause—the child or the match-box. 
Similarly, it is obviously better to remove the cause of 
disease or evil in the world and thus put an end to all misery. 

There is a law of cause and effect in the world, 
which means that there can be no effect without a cause. 
Now if we know the cause which produces pain and 
misery, we can by removing that cause, put a stop to and 
prevent all the pain and misery of the world. 

Q. But how ts tt possible for us to know the cause 7? 

Ans. The root of all evil and misery is ignorance. Lord 
Buddha said that all suffering came from ignorance; 
‘‘ Dispel ignorance, make men wise, and then all difficulties 
will vanish.” Says a Master of the Wisdom: ‘“ Those 
who are on His (God's) side know why they are here and 
what they should do, and they are trying to do it; all the 
others do not yet know what they should do, and so they 
often act foolishly.” The ordinary man has no idea of 
the laws of nature in the physical world, much less in the 
mental and moral worlds. Not knowing who he is and what 
his true happiness consists in, he foolishly goes after the 
wrong thing and in consequence suffers pain and misery. 


WHAT THEOSOPHY Is 43 


So until he has acquired a knowledge of the laws of life 
and nature by the study of Divine Wisdom or Theosophy, 
he is not likely to be free from pain and suffering. 

Q. How will Theosophy help me in acquiring a fuller 

knowledge of the laws of life and nature and why should I 
be a@ Theosophist ? 

Ans. As explained before, Theosophy is a synthesis of 
religion, philosophy and science. Science has made much 
progress in the past, but now is practically at a deadlock. 
Theosophy can help it with an intelligent theory of the 
universe from the primary substance, the objective universe 
with its countless lives and related to man by means of his 
body and the senses, the seven planes of nature, etc. Thus 
Theosophy, the Science of the Soul, takes the scientific 
student by the hand and leads him along new avenues of 
thought. 

Then also Theosophy is the basis of Religion and 
the Philosophy of Life. We see all kinds of social 
problems—extreme poverty and extreme riches, desperate 
misery and heart-rending degradation, side by side with 
great progress in science and arts. The teachings of 
Theosophy explain the root-causes of evil and point out 
the sure way of escape. 

‘‘ Ten Good Reasons for Theosophy ”’ are sometimes 
given as under : 

1.—It solves the Riddle of the Universe : harmonising 
the facts of Science with the fundamental truths of 
Religion. 

2.—It proves life worth living, by rendering it 
intelligible, and demonstrating the justice and the love 
which guide its evolution. 


3.—It removes all fear of death, and much of its 
sorrow ; recognising birth and death, joy and sorrow, as 
alternating incidents in a cycle of endless progress. 


a4 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


4.—It insists upon the optimistic view of life; 
proclaiming man the Master of his own destiny; child 
of his past; parent of his future. 


5.—It demonstrates the Power, the Wisdom, and 
the Love of God; notwithstanding all the sorrow and 
misery of the world. 


6.—It brings hope to the hopeless; showing that no 
effort is ever wasted, no error irretrievable. 


7.—It proclaims the Fatherhood of God; hence the 
Sonship of Man, and his ultimate attainment of perfection. 


8.—It declares the universality of the Law of 
Causation, maintaining that—“ whatsoever a man soweth, 
that shall he also reap,” in this, and in all other worlds. 


9.—It regards the world as a school to which man 

returns again and again until all its lessons are acquired. 

10.—It affirms the Brotherhood of man; and provides 

a basis of union for all who desire to work for its realisation. 

“Theosophy gives Science new realms to conquer ; 

it lifts the hopelessness from social conditions; it shows 

the way to perfect self-sacrifice ; it teaches Reincarnation, 

Karma and Brotherhood. These are some of the reasons 
why you should be a Theosophist.”’ 

Q. But one can be a Theosophist at heart, study 
Theosophy and also serve humanity tn all possible ways 
without joining the organisation. Wherein, then, lies the 
advantage of becoming a member of the Society ? 

Ans. Persons should come into the Society not ‘to 
get’ but “to give’; to become co-workers with God by 
spreading on every side the light of the knowledge they 
have gained; to toil, to work for the future, and by the 
realisation in their hearts of what is coming, help to make 
it come more quickly ; to be enrolled amongst the Servants 
of Humanity who are working for the coming recognition 
of a spiritual Brotherhood amongst men. 


WHAT THEOSOPRY IS 45 


Thus it is a privilege to join the Society, and work 
for the Society is its own reward, while the opportunity 
grasped now will give a member a larger opportunity 
for unselfish work in the future. This in itself is a great 
personal gain to a member who in addition becomes part 
of a living organism and shares its life, which is of a 
higher order, both in quality and quantity, than his own life 
as an individual. In other words, his consciousness becomes 
linked with that of the leaders of the movement and through 
them to the Masters of the Wisdom, the real founders of 
the Society. 

Again, the practical application of Theosophy is 
philanthropy, and the true Theosophist is ever a philan- 
thropist. Now, people dissipate their energies and do not 
succeed in breaking down a wall in front of them when 
each individual is knocking independently at a different 
place. But work is more useful and effective when carried 
on with concerted effort by a group or a society than when 
undertaken by independent individuals, and the problems 
of the spiritual and social progress of the world can be 
dealt with much better by such a Society under the guid- 
ance of the Great Ones than by individual men, however 
sincere and well-intentioned they may be. 

Many could not help coming into the Society, for they 
have in the past taken great pains to study the Ancient 
Wisdom and laboured and worked for the dissemination of 
spiritual knowledge. Their brains may not remember, 
they may not be aware of it, but their ego knows and in 
their superconsciousness that knowledge resides. The 
proof that the memory is there, that the consciousness is 
awake on the higher planes, lies in the fact that, unlike 
otherwise clever people who feel a sort of intellectual 
vagueness in the study of Theosophy, they are able quickly 


46 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


to grasp all the main Theosophical principles, and feel 
like traversing old ground, reviving ancient memories 
of the knowledge imbibed in the past. Law is law; 
opportunities earned cannot be withheld; and it was 
their good Karma to join the Society, as in the past they 
had won the right to come into it, and by past well-doing 
had merited the present privilege of again spreading the 
Theosophical knowledge. 
‘“‘ Of perfect service rendered, duties done 
In charity, soft speech, and stainless days : 
These riches shall not fade away in life, 
Nor any death dispraise.”’ 

One chief value of membership in the Society lies in 
the insight it gives a member into certain fundamental 
truths—laws of reincarnation and Karma and brotherhood 
of man—knowledge of which makes for contentment and 
hopeful endeavour, ignorance of which leads to misery and 
despair. Of course, knowledge is valueless save as it is 
transmuted into service, and memberhip in the Society, 
meaning added knowledge through the companionship of 
others who know, emphatically means increased and more 
effective service. 

A man by joining the Society may be able to serve 
as a channel through which spiritual life may be poured 
into the religion to which he belongs, and may thus be 
honoured by being used by the Guardians of Humanity in 
Their great work of quickening evolution and of lifting 
the world. 

A Great Teacher once said that in all the world 
there are only two kinds of people: those who know and, 
because they know, are working; and those who do not 
know and are therefore idle. But only that knowledge 
which is woven into life, which is acted upon, whose precepts 


WHAT THEOSOPHY IS 47 


are practised, is real knowledge. As a man lives the 
truths, they become part of him. Outsiders may profess 
belief in the principles of Theosophy and may yet rest 
content with that belief. But, like “ Handsome is that 
handsome does,”’ a ‘“‘ Theosophist is who Theosophy does,” 
and members of the Society, having accepted the first 
object— Universal Brotherhood of humanity,—must try to 
make themselves instruments of tmpersonal help in all 
departments of life ; they must be in the forefront of all 
movements striving to spread brotherhood, become sources 
of true spiritual happiness to their fellow-creatures and 
bring enlightenment into people’s lives; in short, they 
must strive to school themselves by actual service to be 
instruments in the hands of the real Founders of the 
Society, the Masters of the Wisdom; and thus their 
membership protects them against their lower nature of 
sluggishness and indolence in the work of practical 
brotherhood and the welfare of humanity. 

Members of the Scciety, all the world over, have the 
same ideals and beliefs, and these naturally bind them 
into a close friendship. From this friendship there grows 
a great co-operation, and with co-operation comes a 
realisation of their strength. For the Society is like a 
great power-house and has behind it a great force, both 
spiritual and temporal, for the helping and guiding of 
humanity ; and membership in the Society confers the 
privilege of wielding that power and of being one of the 
guiding and spiritualising forces of the world. 

A few members of the Society grouped together 
form a centre through which the Masters work, for One of 
the Greatest of Them has said: ‘‘ Where two or three are 
gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of 
them.” Thus They are always ready to give of Their 


48 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


power and strength where a pure channel is made, and 
membership in the Society provides such a channel for 
Their blissful influence and offers to the members an un- 
equalled opportunity of doing Them true and laudable 
service by acting as an instrument ready to Their hands, 
an instrument self-conscious yet readily adaptable—men 
who realise themselves as a connected unity and whom 
They can use in Their great work of the spiritual 
regeneration of humanity. 

Finally, if a member truly in earnest cares, in the 
ways of inner purification and outer unselfish action, to 
commit himself to be a disciple of one of the Great Ones, 
he will find his life utterly changed and will discover a 
new world of spiritual experience opened before him, 
because whatever the struggle before him, he never 
ultimately fails, because in all circumstances of life he no 
longer does his chosen work alone, but under the guidance 
and blessing of an invisible Teacher and Friend, under 
the direction of an invisible Captain and Guide. 

The Great Ones want workers, and some must 
be Their agents and helpers in the lower worlds. Why 
should it not be you and I who may serve Them in Their 
grand and glorious work of the spiritual and social progress 
of the world and the evolution of mankind ? 


CHAPTER II 
GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 


Ouestion. Do you believe in God ? 

Answer. If you mean an extra-cosmic and anthropo- 
morphic God, or if you think that the relation between 
God and the universe (or our world) is as that between the 
potter and the pot, such a God we absolutely deny for 
several reasons. First, He is called by His devotees 
infinite and absolute. Now form implies limitation, a 
beginning and an end; and if God be infinite, limitless 
and absolute, how can He be thought of as limited 
to a form ? Secondly, if He be limitless, He must be every- 
where; and if He be everywhere, He cannot create an 
external universe, for where lies the space for creation ? 
Thirdly, thinking and planning is necessary before 
creation, but how can the Absolute think, because thinking 
implies a relation with something thought of, limited and 
finite? Fourthly, a creator must make some movement 
in space to create a universe, which seems impossible for 
the Infinite who is already everywhere. Fifthly, if God is 
separate from His universe, that is, if God is one thing 
and the universe something else, like the potter and the 
pot, whence did Gol bring the material for creation when 
it is believed that there was nothing but God in the 

7 


50 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


beginning ? Therefore we cannot believe in such an ultimate 
extra-cosmic God, 

Again, God is called all-just and all-merciful on the 
one hand, and on the other He is believed to be the dis- 
penser of gloom and glory, of pain and happiness to 
mankind. But if one person leads a happy life from birth 
to death and another has to suffer all through his life, at 
the sweet will of God, such a God can either be only all- 
powerful (without being just) or all-just (without being 
powerful). | 

Moreover, some people who profess to believe that 
God is all-mighty, at the same time believe that Satan 
must be the cause of all misery and pain in the world. 
But if so, it implies that such a God is powerless against 
Satan, and consequently not all-powerful. 

Once again, God is called all-knowing or omnis- 
cient, that is, knower of past, present and future. In the 
same breath it is said that His own angel went against 
Him and turned Satan. This suggests that God had not 
the prescience to know that His own angel would go 
against Him, and consequently He cannot be called all- 
knowing. 

Yet again, God is considered to be infinite and 
omnipresent, but He is expected to be seen and met with 
in heaven only. These two things seem incompatible. If 
infinite or without form or limit, how can He be in heaven 
alone, or sit or stand at any particular place? Such a 
God seems merely to be the creation of the imagination of 
the childish and the thoughtless, and is a philosophical and 
logical absurdity. 

Q. Then please explain your conception of God. 
Ans. We believe inthe One Existence, the One who is 
the centre of all life; an Omnipresent, Eternal, Boundless 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 5r 


and Immutable PRINCIPLE, on which all speculation is 
impossible ; the One only without a Second; One Infinite 
Eternal, Changeless Existence; the All; one Eternal Now 
without past, present or future; out of space and time, the 
Unmanifested Logos; Boundless Space—Zarwané Akrané 
—of Zoroastrianism; the Ineffable Thrice-unknown 
Darkness of the Greek Orphic System; called by the 
Hindus, Parabrahman—the Supreme Brahman; Param- 
atman—the Supreme Self; also the Nirguna Brahman— 
the Brahman without attributes or the unconditioned 
Brahman—to_ distinguish the unmanifested state of 
Brahman, the All, from the manifested state, in which 
Brahman is called the Saguna Brahman—the Brahman 
with attributes, or the conditioned Brahman; Brahman 
revealed—the Supreme Ishvara with His universe. 

From That all comes forth; to That all returns. 
That includes within itself all that ever has been, is, and 
can be. As a wave rises in the ocean, a universe rises In 
the All. As the wave sinks again into the ocean, a uni- 
verse sinks again into the All. As the ocean is water, and 
the wave a form or manifestation of the water, so is there 
one Existence, and the universe is a form, or manifestation, 
of the Existence. ‘ All this verily (is) Brahman.” Thus 
all universes rise and fall in the All, are born and die in 
His immensity. 

Q. Then does the One without a Second build our 
Solar System ? 

Ans. No, not directly. Coming forth from the depth of 
the One Existence, a Logos, by imposing upon Himself 
a limit, becomes the manifested God, and tracing the 
limiting sphere of His activity outlines the area of His 
universe. The manifested and the unmanifested are 
merely “the two states of Brahman”. This manifested 


52 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Logos is not “‘a Second,” but “ The One ”’ in manifestation, 
the Saguna Brahman, the Brahman with attributes, men- 
tioned above, the Cosmic Logos, the Supreme Ruler of the 
universe, the self-existing One, the Root and Cause of all. 
beings, also sometimes called Purusottama, the Supreme 
Spirit, The Self. With Himself as Spirit He reveals the 
other side of the All, which is named Milaprakriti, the 
Root of Matter. He manifests a part of Himself, esta- 
blishes the universe with a portion of Himself, al]-tran- 
scending, all-embracing, the manifested God, limiting 
Himself by manifestation. He then unfolds Himself into a 
threefold form, the three great Logoi of cosmic evolution, 
so that Trimurti or Trinity is the aspect towards the 
universe of the Manifested God. 

Associated with the work of the Cosmic Logos in 
the Universe are seven Embodiments of His nature, called 
the Seven Cosmic Planetary Logoi. All the stars in the 
universe, which are centres of great evolutionary systems, 
belong to one or other of these great Seven, and are in 
some way expressions of Their life, as They in turn are 
expressions of the One Life of the Cosmic Logos. 

In the One Existence are innumerable universes ; 
in each universe countless solar systems. Each solar 
system is energised and controlled by a mighty Being, 
Ishvara, the Solar Logos, the Solar Deity. Asa Star, the 
Lord of a System among the myriads of stars, He lives and 
moves and has His Being in His Father-Star, one of the 
great Seven; yet does He mirror directly the Life and Light 
and Glory of the One without a Second. He is to that 
system all that men mean by God. He permeates it; 
there is nothing which is not He. He is immanent in 
every atom of the system, all-pervading, all sustaining, all- 
evolving. He is in everything, and everything is in Him. 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 53 


Out of Himself our Solar Logos has called our solar 
system into being, and we who are in it are evolving 
fragments of His life; from Him we all have come; into 
Him we shall all return. 

Yet He exists above His system, living a stupendous 
life of His own among His Peers—other Solar Logol, 
Brother-Stars of His Company. ‘ Having pervaded the 
whole universe with a fragment of Myself, I remain.” Of 
that higher life of His, we can know nothing, but when 
He puts Himself down into such conditions as are within 
our reach, His manifestation is ever threefold. In the 
evolution of any solar system, three of the highest 
principles of the Logos of the system (generally called 
the three Logoi of the system) correspond to and res- 
pectively fulfil the functions of the three Great Logoi of 
cosmic evolution. And so the manifestation of the Logos 
of our system is threefold; three, yet fundamentally one ; 
three Persons (for person means a mask), yet one God, 
showing Himself in those three aspects which are but facets 
of Him. Thus there is a very real meaning in the 
insistence of the Christian Church that “ we worship one 
God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding 
the Persons nor dividing the substance ’—that is to say, 
never confusing in our minds the work and functions of 
the three separate Persons (literally—masks) or manifes- 
tations, each on His own plane, yet never for a moment 
forgetting the Eternal Unity of the ‘ substance,” that 
which lies behind all alike on the highest plane. 

The aspect of Ishvara in which He creates the 
worlds is named Brahma by the Hindus, and the Holy 
Ghost by the Christians. That aspect in which Ishvara 
preserves and maintains the worlds, is named Vishnu 
by the Hindus, the Son by the Christians. The aspect 


54 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


in which He dissolves the worlds when they are worn out 
and of no further use, is named Shiva or Mahadeva by 
the Hindus, the Father by the Christians. 

Next below the Solar Deity, yet also in some mysterious 
manner part of Him—like the Cosmic Logos and His 
seven Embodiments, the seven Cosmic Planetary Logoi— 
come His seven ministers, the seven expressions of His 
nature, the seven channels of His inexhaustible Life, 
called the seven Solar Planetary Logoi or the Planetary 
Spirits. In Hinduism they are called the seven Prajdpatis 
(Lords of Creatures), in Zoroastrianism the seven Amesha 
Spentés (Immortal Holy Ones), in the Hebrew and 
Christian tradition the “Seven Spirits before the throne 
of God”. The energies of these Seven control and direct 
all that takes place within the solar system. They are the 
rulers of the planets Vulcan, Venus, Earth, Jupiter, 
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Each of the Seven is the 
Head and Ruler of hierarchies of creative entities who 
work under His direction in the building and sustaining 
of the solar system; under each are ranged Devas or 
Shining Ones or Angelic hosts, called Adityas, Vasus, 
Dhyan Chohidns, etc., in Oriental religions, or Angels, 
Archangels, Thrones, etc., in the Christian tradition— 
manifestations of the One, the innumerable ministers of 
the Supreme Will. 

Presiding over our world there is a great Official 
who represents the Solar Deity. He is the true King of 
this world, in absolute control of all evolution that takes 
place upon our planet, and under Him are ministers in 
charge of different departments. 

Thus the God we believe in, the Supreme Lord of 
our system, manifests Himself in the system under a triple 
form, a Trinity; the Regenerator, the Preserver, the 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 55 


Creator; spoken of by the Theosophist as the First, the 
Second and the Third Logos; the Father, the Son and 
the Holy Spirit of the Christian; Shiva, Vishnu and 
Brahma of the Hindu; the Kefher, inah@nd\Chochmah} 
of the Hebrew Kabbalist; Ahura, zda and Atura- 
mazda—the Life, Wisdom and the One Existence—of the 
Zoroastrian. He is everywhere and in everything, and 
is everything. The whole world is but a manifestation 
of Him. He is manifested in countless forms, in countless 
graties of living intelligences who all come forth from 
Him, as later on from Him come forth vegetable, animal 
and man. Thus there is only the One Life manifested in 
infinite forms. Man, vegetable, mineral, are all expressions 
of that Life. The grain of dust could not be, were God 
absent from it; the loftiest Archangel is but another 
expression of Him, of the One. Thus God being im- 
manent in all, all are sharers in one Life and form one 
great Brotherhood. 
Q. Can the existence of God be proved ? 
Ans. No purely intellectual process of reasoning affords 
a complete demonstration of the existence of God, satis- 
factory to all minds. That existence can be proved 
indirectly by reason, devotion and purity of life. Long 
and careful study of nature proves the probability of a 
‘Divine Architect’ who builds the worlds; the One 
Existence is seen to be a philosophical necessity, and the 
manifestation of the primal Duality—Pratyagatma and 
Miilaprakrti or the root of Spirit and the root of Matter— 
a cosmic necessity ; Pratyagatma emotionally contemplat- 
ed, is God, the Supreme Lord. 
Devotion to God enables a man to feel His exist- 
ence, and to gain strength and peace from Him. Asa 
man grows purer, nobler, more loving, he begins to know 


56 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


God, and no more needs proof of His existence than he 
needs proofs of the light by which he sees. 

But the ultimate and direct proof lies in the Self 
within. His “ only proof is the consciousness in the Self’. 
Each of us is quite sure that he himself exists ; thus we 
have many existences, each sure of itself; but these 
cannot arise severally and independently, any more than a 
fountain can spring up in the air where there is no water ; 
these selves arise from One Self, are parts of One Self, 
and that Self is God. Hence is the conviction of the Self 
His only proof, the realisation of the Divine in us, our 
true Self, that recognises the Divine Self without us by 
identity of nature. Thus only by realising the Divine 
Self in ourselves can we know the Divine Self outside 
ourselves, the Self in which ‘ we live and move and have 
our being ’. 

QO. What is the object of God in creating the universe ? 

Ans. The term “creation ”’ is popularly used in modern 
days to mean making something out of nothing—an 
impossible feat. “The unreal hath no being; the real 
never ceaseth to be,’’ says Shri Krishna in the most 
famous jewel of Aryan literature, the Bhagavad-Gita. 
This idea of creation arose in an unphilosophic age among 
ignorant people. In older days that which is now called 
creation was regarded as rearrangement—the rearrange- 
ment of existing matter into fresh shapes, and such terms 
as the Heavenly Builder, the Great Architect, the 
Fashioner, the Artificer, the Worker, were used instead 
of Creator. The word ‘creation’ is still used in this sense 
of shaping anew what exists, when it is said that an artist 
“creates ’ a picture or a Statue. 

That emanation, not creation, is a manifestation of 
Divine Life, the natural expression of a phase of the 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 57 


Divine Nature. The question ‘what is the object of 
emanation, has been answered in various ways. There 
are many possible reasons, but a kitten cannot understand 
why a man spends his time reading a book instead of 
running after a leaf on the ground, because the conscious- 
ness of the kitten is not developed enough to read a book ; 
and we are all nearer to the kitten than to God in one 
sense, that is, in our comprehension of His nature. Still, 
some say that the love of God wanted to bring to self- 
consciousness many beings able to share His bliss and love ; 
some say that Love desired to be loved. The Christians 
say that it is to show forth His glory. The Sufi says: 
** He was a hidden treasure and desired to be made mani- 
fest.’” The Upanishat says: “ He willed: I will multiply.” 
The final answer seems to be that in the Universal, the 
All, all universes, everything that was, is and can be, exist 
eternally; but that in time and space, one or another 
universe appears and then disappears. ‘“God”’ is the 
manifested, the Saguna Brahman, or the Ishvara, the 
Lord of a universe, and He gives objective existence, in 
time and space, to part of that which ever is, in eternity. 
What seems certain is that: the object of man being here is 
to unfold his capacities and to reflect the Divine perfec- 
tion—to reach “the measure of the stature of the Christ”. 

Q. How is our solar system formed ? 

Ans. At the earliest point of history that we can reach, 
the opposites of spirit and matter, of life and form, are 
already in full activity. What we commonly call force 
and matter are in reality two varieties of spirit at different 
stages in evolution. The ultimate root-matter as seen 
at our level is what scientists call the zther of space; in 
Theosophical studies it is spoken of as Kotlon, “the 


emptiness,’ the primordial negation of matter, because to 
8 


58 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


every physical sense the space occupied by it appears 
empty. This substance, perceptible only to highly devel- 
oped clairvoyant power, originally filled all space, but some 
Being, infinitely higher than our Solar Deity, changed this 
condition of rest by pouring out His spirit or force into a 
certain section of the matter, a section of the size of a 
whole universe. The introduction of that force formed 
within the ether an incalculable number of tiny spherical 
bubbles, spoken of in The Secret Doctrine as the holes 
which Fohat digs in space. Each “ bubble” or point of 
light is where Kozlon is not; each bubble is in reality a 
point of His consciousness, and persists only so long as He 
wills to keep back the enveloping Koilon. These bubbles 
are the ultimate atoms, final units, of which what we call 
matter is composed; and thus matter is nothing but 
holes in zther. 

When the Solar Deity begins to make His system, 
He finds this material consisting of an infinite number of 
tiny bubbles ready to His hand. He first defines the limit 
of His field of activity, a vast sphere with a circumference 
far larger than the orbit of the outermost of His future 
planets. Within the limit of that sphere He sets up a kind 
of gigantic vortex, sweeping together all the bubbles into a 
vast central mass—the material of the nebula that is to be. 
Acting through His Third Aspect He sends forth into this 
stupendous revolving sphere seven successive impulses of 
force, gathering together the bubbles into ever more and 
more complex aggregations, as explained in the Three Great 
Outpourings in Chapter VIII. In this way are formed 
seven gigantic interpenetrating and concentric worlds of 
matter, all one in essence because built of the same kind of 
matter, but differing in their degree of density. These 
seven types of matter or .kinds of atoms are freely 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 59 


intermingled, so that specimens of each type would be 
found in the smallest portion of the sphere taken at 
random. The grossest of these seven kinds of atoms—the 
ultimate physical atoms—are then drawn together into 
certain aggregations, thus making a number of different 
kinds of what may be called proto-elements, and these 
again are joined together into the various forms which are 
known to Science as chemical elements. 

This process extended over long periods of time, 
but as ages rolled on, the stage of a vast glowing nebula 
was reached. As the sphere cooled, still rapidly rotating, 
it flattened into a huge disc and broke up into rings sur- 
rounding a central body which later on formed our sun. 
The Deity then set up in the thickness of each ring a 
subsidiary vortex, collecting therein a great deal of the 
matter of the ring which formed a planet round the 
central body. The collision of the gathered fragments 
having caused a revival of the heat, the resulting planet 
was for a long time a mass of glowing gas, but gradually it 
cooled once more until it became fit for human habitation. 

Each of the planets of our solar system is thus com- 
posed of seven types of atoms, aggregations of which yield 
the seven fundamental types of matter found in the system, 
each denser than its predecessor, and called planes of 
nature. 

Q. Ordinarily we know of only three states of matter, 
solid, liquid and gaseous. Then what are these seven 
kinds, and what do you mean by planes of nature ? 

Ans. What we usually call solid, liquid and gaseous are 
merely substates or subdivisions of the lowest, the physical 
kind of matter. The whole matter of the solar system is 
made up of seven types of atoms of varying densities, from 
the grossest to the rarest, and each region with its matter 


60 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


composed of a particular type of atoms and correlated 
with a distinct stage of consciousness is called a plane or 
world, and hence we recognise seven such planes in the 
solar system. 

Q. What have these planes to do with our earth and 
how is our earth formed 7 

Ans. These seven types of matter interpenetrating one 
another are partly aggregated into planets, worlds or 
globes, and are not evenly spread over the whole area of 
the solar system. The three finest do spread over the 
whole, and are thus common to the system, but the four 
denser kinds compose and surround the globes and planets. 
The earth we live on being one of those planets, the seven 
kinds of matter make up its constitution. 

QO. Then is not our earth formed of mere physical 
matter ? 

A. Our earth is not built up only of the matter of the 
lowest or seventh plane or world, but has also an abundant 
supply of the matter of the sixth, the fifth and other 
worlds. Particles of matter even in the hardest substance 
never actually touch one another, as has been fully proved 
by men of science. The atoms are extremely minute in 
proportion to the spaces between them, each being like a 
solitary speck of dust in a large hall. So all the other 
kinds of atoms of all those other subtler planes have ample 
room, not only to lie between the atoms of the denser 
matter, but also to move freely among and around them. 
Consequently the globe upon which we live is not one 
world composed of matter of one type only, but seven 
worlds made up of matter of different types, interpenetrat- 
ing one another and all occupying the same space. 

Q. How can different kinds of matter occupy the same 
space without displacing one another ? 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 61 


Ans. That is possible owing to the space between the 
atoms always being proportionately much larger than the 
size of those atoms. Take the example of a sponge or a 
cloth-ball dipped in water. The solid matter of the ball 
or the sponge occupies a certain space, but all the holes 
or interspaces in that sponge hold water, and thus water 
practically occupies the same space as the sponge. At 
the same time minute particles of air are held suspended 
in the water, and thus the solid, liquid and gaseous matters 
occupy the same space in that sponge. 

Q. Where are these different planes located on our 
earth ? 

Ans. The subtle worlds are all around us, though 
we are normally unconscious of their existence. They 
are not one over the other like the layers of an onion, but 
are contained one within the other, the solid physical earth 
being embedded in the very heart of them all. The 
sixth world is larger than the seventh—the physical—and 
extends much farther into space, but at the same time 
permeates the physical matter of the earth everywhere. 
The fifth extends beyond the sixth, but permeates the other 
two like water vapour spreading through the air. Thus 
the world in which we live is not one world, but seven 
interpenetrating worlds all occupying the same space 
except that the finer kinds of matter extend further from 
the centre than do the grosser kinds. 

Q. How are these seven planes or tnterpenetrating 
worlds named ? 

Ans. The highest or the subtlest region is called the 
Mahdparanirvanic, or the Adi or the Divine. The second 
is named Paranirvanic or the Anupdadaka, also called 
Monadic, because therein dwell the sparks of the divine 
Life, the human Monads, it being the birth-place and 


62 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


habitat of the human Self, the Monad, the God in man. 
The third is called the Nirvanic or the Atmic, as the 
highest spirit in man—Atma—as now constituted, functions 
in it. The fourth is the Buddhic or the Intuitional world, 
the world of the highest intuitions. The last two are also 
called the spiritual planes, for there the man realises 
himself as divine. The fifth, still more dense is called the 
Manasic, the Intellectual, or the mental, the mind of man 
being formed of the matter of that plane. The sixth is the 
Astral or the emotional and passional world, because the 
emotions and passions of man cause undulations in its 
matter; the seventh is the physical world, part only of 
which we cognise with our senses. Of the above planes 
the two highest cannot be touched by man at present, as 
we have to be self-conscious only on the other five to 
reach our goal as Perfect Men for our present age or 
dispensation. 

Fach of these planes 1s again subdivided into seven 
and has seven substates of matter. 

Q. How ts each plane subdivided and what are those 
substates of matter 7? 

Ans. Each plane is divided into seven subdivisions, 
thus having seven substates of matter. 

The physical plane has seven subdivisions, repre- 
sented by seven degrees of density of matter. Rising from 
the gross to the subtle, the matter of those subdivisions is 
called solid, liquid, gaseous, etheric, super-etheric, sub- 
atomic, and atomic. The four finer kinds of matter are 
made up of what is ordinarily called ether of four densities 
or grades, ether itself being physical though invisible to the 
normal human eye. All these substates of matter belong to 
the physical plane only. The finest or the ultimate physical 
atoms of the atomic subplane aggregate into what are 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 63 


called proto-elements, and the latter again join together 
into various forms known to science as chemical elements. 

The astral plane is similarly divided into seven, but 
has two main divisions, the lower astral having four sub- 
divisions and the higher astral the remaining three. 

Similarly, the fifth plane, the mental, has two main 
divisions, the Rupa Loka and the Arupa Loka, or the 
Form Level and the Formless Level, with four and three 
subdivisions respectively. It includes, though it is not 
identical with, what is called Devachan or Devaloka, the 
land of the Gods, or the heaven. Devachan, the state of 
happiness, bears that name because of its nature and 
condition, nothing interfering with it to cause pain or sor- 
row. It isa specially guarded state into which positive evil 
is not allowed to intrude, a blissful resting place for man to 
peacefully assimilate the fruits of the past physical life. 

The other planes are also similarly subdivided into 
seven each. 

Q. Are the different worlds or planes as well as the 
subplanes composed of different kinds of matter ? 

Ans. Each world has its own type of matter, the matter 
of the atomic sub-plane, and has also its own substances 
Or aggregations of that matter arranged into seven sub- 
States; but any type of matter is formed out of the 
grossest matter of the world next above, and thus the 
matter of which all the interpenetrating worlds are built 
is essentially the same though differently arranged and 
of different degrees of density. 

Q. Please explain this in detatl as far as the physical 
world ts concerned. 

Ans. Formerly it was believed by Science that chemical 
atoms were the ultimate units of all physical forms ; but 
later on they were found to be complex structures, so 


64 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


much so that Sir William Crookes in a remarkable paper 
read before one of the English scientific societies advanced 
the theory of a primitive substance, named protyle, 
underlying physical matter of all kinds, while now the 
existence of electrons or ultimate particles is the prevail- 
ing belief of Science. 

Any physical object, normally visible, expands by 
the application of heat which increases the vibrations of 
its compound molecules, and after a certain point breaks 
up and passes from its normal condition to that next above 
it. Thus any substance can be transformed from the solid 
to the liquid condition (7.e., can be melted, like ice into 
water) and from the liquid to the gaseous (like water into 
steam) by increasing the vibrations of the compound 
molecules till they are shaken apart into simpler molecules, 
and this process of changing from one substate to a subtler 
one can be repeated by certain methods for any physical 
substance till that substance is finally reduced into ultimate 
physical atoms. The reason is that though all forms of 
the first or atomic subdivision are built by the compression 
into certain shapes of the physical atoms (typified 
for the moment by bricks), to make the matter of the 
next lower or second subdivision a certain number of the 
physical atoms (or bricks) is first gathered together and 
cemented into small blocks of four atoms (or bricks) each, 
or five or more atoms each, and these blocks used as 
building-stones ; while for the next lower or third subdivi- 
sion the building-stones are formed by several of the blocks 
of the second subdivision cemented together in certain 
shapes, and so on to the lowest. 

Thus all physical substances, gross or fine, are 
found to be made up by different arrangements and 
combinations of ultimate physical atoms; and the latter 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 65 


being all identical, except that some of them are positive 
and some negative, any substance can be transmuted into 
another by first reducing that substance into ultimate 
physical atoms and then rebuilding those atoms by a dif- 
ferent arrangement into the other substance, thus trans- 
ferring alchemy from the realm of superstition into that 
of reality. 

The ultimate physical atom can again be broken 
up by certain methods into the matter of the grossest 
subdivision of the astral plane. Similarly, the finest or 
ultimate astral atom can be broken up into atoms of the 
grossest subdivision of the mental plane. 

QO. If these seven planes exist all round us, why are 
we not normally conscious of thetr existence ? 

Ans. Man becomes ordinarily conscious of anything 
only with the help of one or more of his five senses, but 
obviously he can be nothing but unconscious of the 
existence of a thing which he can neither see, nor smell, 
nor taste, nor touch, nor hear. Even in case of things 
physically gross enough the senses cannot be entirely relied 
on for several reasons : 

1. Owing to long distance; the planet Neptune is 
not seen, though it exists. 

2. Owing to close proximity ; the collyrium in the eye. 

3. Owing to weakness of senses; sounds are not 
heard owing to deafness. 

4. Owing to minuteness; water particles in the 
Surrounding air. 

3. Owing to the predominance of another thing still 
greater; the planet Mercury is not seen in the light of 
the sun. 

Q. Then how can the existence of things not cognised 
by the physical senses be proved ? 

9 


66 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Ans. It can be proved by the acquisition of superphysi- 
cal powers at present latent in man. If science has made so 
much progress when only the three lowest substates of the 
physical plane are known, it can make immeasurable 
progress for the good of all if a knowledge of even the 
fine ethers be acquired, thus fulfilling, though only in 
part, the third object of the Society. 

Q. This merely carries the difficulty a stage further 
back. How can you prove the existence of supernatural 
powers tn man ? 

Ans. There is nothing syemetiiata as everything takes 
place within the domain of natural law. 

Hypnotism, mesmerism, clairvoyance, telepathy, 
etc., are now facts acknowledged by the scientific world. 
A ‘subject’ made artificially clairvoyant in his sleep by a 
hypnotist is able to see anything in any part of the 
world, which he cannot do by means of the physical 
eye, and this proves the existence of some ‘ superphysi- 
cal’ power. Again, researches in spiritualism prove 
the existence of the astral plane and the survival of 
man after death, though neither can be sensed by sense- 
organs. 

Moreover, we are conscious of the effects of only a 
few sets of vibrations in air or ether, and these we call 
sound, electricity, light, etc., while we are oblivious of the 
existence of innumerable other kinds of vibrations pro- 
ducing other sounds, colours, lights, forms, etc. This 
again is admitted by science. 

Theosophy has proved on the strength of actual 
experience that in every man there are some inactive 
senses which, when stimulated, can make investigation 
possible into the realm of matter normally lying unper- 
ceived around us. 


GOD AND THE SOLAR SYSTEM 67 


Occultists there have been and are, who by devel- 
oping their superphysical senses have investigated the 
etheric part of our world and other higher realms, and 
their investigations are priceless in their value to humanity. 

Again, there are Masters, Perfected Men, who have 
fully awakened Their subtle senses as They have completed 
Their human evolution and remain in touch with the 
world only to assist humanity in its growth; and Their 
disciples also awaken and develop subtle senses one after 
another under Their directions and verify Their statements. 

QO. I understand that the world we live in ts not one 
world, but seven interpenetrating worlds of finer and finer 
matter all occupying the same space ; but you have added 
that the finer kinds of matter extend further from the 
centre than the grosser kinds do. Then how far does the 
matter of the subtler worlds extend ? 

Ans. The matter of the astral world stretches to a little 
less than the mean distance of the moon. Thus the two 
physical globes—the earth and the moon—being about 
239,000 miles apart, their astral spheres touch each other 
when the moon is at a point in its orbit nearest the earth, 
t.¢., in perigee, but not when she is most remote from the 
earth or in apogee. The mental world is a still larger 
sphere of mental matter, while with the higher globes we 
have spheres large enough to touch the corresponding 
spheres of other planets of our Solar System. 

QO. If these planes or worlds cannot be ordinarily 
known to us, what have we to do with them ? 

Ans. We have regularly to come into close contact with 
at least some of them at our present stage, but to under- 
stand that we must know something of the constitution 
of man as explained in Chapter ITI. 





THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 69 


such evolution as may come to him, is to unfold all his 
latent powers. For the purposes of human evolution the 
true Self, the Monad, manifests himself in lower worlds. He 
clothes himself in garment after garment, each of which is 
made of matter belonging to a definite region of the universe. 
Thus the Self is enabled to come into contact with each 
region and thereby to gain knowledge of it. At the present 
stage of human development, human evolution takes place 
only in five out of the seven planes of nature. 

QO. Butif the Monad stays all the while in the Monadic 
or Anupadaka world, how can he manifest himself in the 
lower worlds ? 

Ans. When the Monad descends one stage and enters 
the spiritual world, he shows himself in three aspects, of 
which the first, remaining always in that world, is called 
Atma or Spirit in man. The second manifesting itself in 
the Intuitional or Buddhic plane is spoken of as Buddhi 
or Intuition in man, while the third, showing itself in the 
higher mental plane, is called Manas or Intelligence in 
man. This threefold manifestation of the Monad on the 
three levels, showing itself as Atma-Buddhi-Manas, or 
spirit, intuition and intellect, is called the ego or the In- 
dividuality, and this ego is the man during the human stage 
of evolution in the world of manifestation or the five-fold 
universe, and is described as a seed, a germ of divine Life, 
containing the potentialities of his own heavenly Father, his 
Monad, which are to be unfolded into powers in the course 
of evolution; he is the nearest correspondence, in fact, to 
the ordinary conception of the soul. The ego takes upon 
himself a vehicle, called the causal body, built of the 
matter of the higher mental plane. Thus man as we know 
him, though in reality a Monad residing in the monadic 
world, shows himself as an ego in the higher mental world, 


70 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


through a vehicle called the causal body, formed of three 
higher subplanes of the mental world. 

Now the ego before descending to the physical 
world has to pass through the lower mental and astral 
worlds, and in doing so draws round himself veils of the 
matter of those planes, which are later on formed into the 
mental and astral bodies. Only after having assumed 
these intermediate vehicles can he come into touch with 
the baby physical body and be born into the physical 
world, living his physical life and working there to gain 
knowledge of it. At the end of his life, when the physical 
body is worn out, he reverses this process of descent, 
drops first his physical body and centres his life in the 
astral body in the astral world, later casts that vehicle aside 
and stays in the mental world in the mental body for a long 
time, and when that too is cast aside, is once more the ego 
in his own world. After a time he again repeats the 
process of descent into denser matter, and assumes once 
more a mental, an astral and a physical body. 

The ego grows, but otherwise lives unchanged till 
he attains his goal of being merged into divinity. He is 
not affected by births and deaths, but living on in the 
permanent causal body from life to life, retains the memory 
of the experiences of all his personalities ; what is com- 
monly spoken of as a lifetime is merely a day in his real 
life, and the physical body which is born and dies, is 
simply a garment put on for the furtherance of his evolution. 

This, then, is the real constitution of man. He is a 
Monad, a Spark of the Divine, and of that Monad the ego, 
clothed in the causal body, is a partial expression, formed 
that he may enter evolution and return to the Monad 
with developed qualities and knowledge acquired through 
experience. The ego in his turn puts down part of 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 71 


himself, called a personality, which again wears three 
bodies, the mental, the astral and the physical. Therefore 
when we think and say that we know a man on the 
physical plane, it would be a little nearer the truth to say 
that we know a thousandth part of him. The ego is a 
part of the Monad, somewhat in the proportion of an ear 
to the whole body, and the personality again being a part 
of the ego, what we usually think of as the man is 
merely a fragment of a fragment of the real] man. 

Thus that part of the Individuality or the Ego, 
also called the ‘“* Higher Self,’ which is manifested in a 
reincarnation, at a given time, ina particular race, and 
either aS a man or as a woman, is the personality or the 
‘lower self’. The relation between the individuality 
and the personality has been expressed by many 
symbols, one being that of a string of pearls, where the 
string represents the individuality, and the pearls the 
Separate personalities in successive incarnations. One 
personality only, however, is made by the individuality for 
the purpose of the work to be done in one incarnation, 
and that personality at rebirth takes a new mental, a new 
astral and a new physical body. 

Each of these bodies, again, has a life and con- 
sciousness of its own, quite distinct from the life and con- 
sciousness of the personality whi¢huses the bodies. This 
‘body-consciousness ’ of the mind-body is known as the 
‘mental elemental,’ that of the astral body as the ‘ desire- 
elemental’, and of the physical body as the ‘ physical 
elemental.’ 

Q. Please explain first, what are the mental and astral 
elementals ? 

Ans. The matter of the mental and astral bodies is not 
dead matter. In fact, there is no such thing as‘ dead 


72 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


matter’ anywhere within our ken ; for all matter has been 
vivified by the First Outpouring from the Third Aspect of 
the Logos, while all forms are also ensouled and further 
vivified by the Second Outpouring, which is generally called 
‘elemental essence,’ but which is often described as monadic 
essence, especially when it is ensouling the atomic matter of 
each of the planes on its downward course (see the Three 
Great Outpourings, Chapter VIII). The body-conscious- 
ness of the mental and astral bodies, called respectively the 
mental and astral elemental, is the life of the elemental 
essence of the mental and astral matter in their respective 
vehicles. In the cell-life which permeates them there is as 
yet nothing in the way of intelligence, but there is a strong 
instinct always pressing in the direction of what is good 
for its development. 

What the elemental essence needs for its develop- 
ment is vibration; for it grows, as we ourselves do at a 
much higher level, by learning to respond to impacts from 
without. The living essence in the matter of the mental 
body is therefore always reaching out for varieties in 
vibration and has the strongest possible objection to being 
held down for a long time to one definite rate. This we 
find to be the case in our endeavours at concentration, 
when something within us seems constantly to impel us 
to wandering thought and vigorously to resist our effort to 
hold it down to one definite line. 

The life animating the matter of which mental and 
astral bodies are built is upon the downward arc of evolu- 
tion, moving downwards or outwards into matter, so that 
progress for it means greater materiality, 1.c., descending 
into denser forms of matter and learning to express itself 
through them. Unfoldment for the man is just the 
opposite of this; he has already sunk deeply into matter 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN | 73 


and is now rising out of that towards his source—rising 
from the material to the spiritual, and responding only to 
the more delicate vibrations of high aspirations. There is 
consequently a constant conflict of interests between the 
man within and the life inhabiting the matter of his 
vehicles, inasmuch as its tendency is downward, while his 
is upward. 

The astral elemental, (7.e., the life animating the 
molecules of matter in the astral body,) also called desire- 
elemental, desires for its evolution such undulations as it 
can get, of as many different kinds as possible, and as 
coarse and as strong as possible. Its evolution, like that 
of the mental elemental, is by vibration, and vibration in 
the astral plane is always the result of passion or emotion 
of some sort. The next step in its evolution will be to 
ensoul physical matter, and become used to its still slower 
oscillation ; and as a step on the way to that, it desires the 
grossest and strongest of the astral vibrations. It cannot 
be said to possess any intelligence, because it is not yet 
even at the level of a mineral. Yet it has an extraordinary 
power of adapting itself to its surroundings, and extracting 
from them what it needs, which certainly does sometimes 
look very much like a partial intelligence or very keen 
instinct. 

The life in the mass of molecules in the astral body 
has a sense, though a vague one, of itself as a whole—as 
a kind of temporary entity. It does not know that it is 
part of a man’s astral body ; it is quite incapable of under- 
standing what a man is; but with its curious instinct it 
realises in a blind way that under its present conditions it 
receives many more waves, and much stronger ones, than 
it would receive if floating at large in the atmosphere, in the 


general sea of essence outside. Then would it catch only 
10 


74 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


occasionally, as from a distance, the radiation of man’s 
passions and emotions ; now it is in the very heart of them, 
it can miss none, and it gets them at their strongest. 
Therefore it feels itself in a good position, and makes an 
effort to maintain that position of advantage. The 
particles of the astral body are perpetually being thrown 
off and changed, just as is the case with particles of the 
physical body ; but nevertheless the feeling of individuality 
is communicated to the new particles as they enter, and the 
essence which is included within each man’s astral body 
undoubtedly feels itself a kind of entity, and acts accord- 
ingly for what it considers its interests. 

These interests, as previously stated, are usually 
diametrically opposed to those of the soul. Hence there 
is a perpetual struggle between the two, 1.c., the desire- 
elemental and the soul, or, as St. Paul describes it, 
“‘the law in the members warring against the law of 
the mind”. But it goes further than this. The entity 
finds involved within itself finer matter of some sort—the 
matter of the man’s mental body; and it comes to feel 
that if it can contrive to involve that finer something in 
its own undulations, they will be greatly intensified and 
prolonged. Since astral matter is the vehicle of desire, 
and mental matter the vehicle of thought, this instinct, 
when translated into our language, means that if the 
astral body can induce us to think that we want what 
ét wants, it is much more likely to get it. Thus it 
exercises a slow steady pressure upon the man, a kind of 
hunger on its side, but for him a temptation to what is 
coarse and undesirable. If he be a passionate man, there 
is a gentle but ceaseless pressure in the direction of 
irritability ; if he be a sensual man, an equally steady 
pressure in the direction of impurity. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 75 


That pressure which is neither the prompting of 
his own nature, nora temptation of an imaginary devil, 
is natural, not to the man but to the vehicle which he is 
using ; its desire is natural and right for it, but harmful 
to the man. Hence it is necessary that he should resist 
it. It ought to be rather humiliating to allow himself 
to be defeated or to be used as a tool by something which 
is not even a mineral yet. But if he doesso resist, if he 
declines to yield himself to the feelings suggested to him 
and to gratify the lower desires, he gradually changes the 
astral elemental essence within him and builds quite a 
different creature—a different entity—because the coarse 
particles within him which need those gross vibrations 
become apathetic for lack of nourishment, and eventually 
atrophy and fall out from his astral body, and are 
replaced by other, higher and finer particles, whose 
natural wave-rate is more nearly in accordance with 
that which the man habitually permits within his astral 
body. 

This gives the reason for what are called prompt- 
ings of the lower nature during life. If the man yields 
himself to them, such promptings grow stronger and 
stronger until at last he feels as though he could not 
resist them, and identifies himself with them—which is 
exactly what this curious half-life in the particles of the 
astral body wants him to do. But if he controls his 
desires and lives the Theosophical life, he will close his 
present incarnation with a very much better type of 
desire-elemental than what he brought with him at 
birth, and will consequently commence his new incarnation 
with a much finer type of that elemental. The astral 
elemental also plays an important part in the life of a man 
Just after death, as described in Chapter VI. 


76 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Q. What, now, ¢s the physscal elemental, and what are 
sts functions and nature 7? 

Ans. The body-consciousness of the physical body— 
the physical elemental—is the life of the mineral, vege- 
table and animal streams of life which make up the 
physical body. That body is built up of cells, each of 
which is a tiny separate life animated by the Second Out- 
pouring, (mentioned in the Three Great Outpourings in 
Chapter VIII) which comes forth from the Second Aspect 
of the Deity. All cells combined together into the body 
serve as vehicle of a loftier form of consciousness than any 
which they know in their separated lives. This conscious- 
ness, limited as it is, is sufficient for the purposes of the life 
and functions of the physical body. It is this physical body- 
consciousness—physical elemental—which attracts the 
attention of the individual when there is need for it, #.e., 
urges him to rest when the body Is tired, or creates in 
him the desire for food and drink when the body ts in 
need of those things. The body with its physical ele- 
mental is also clever enough, through long ancestral habit 
of heredity, to protect itself; when attacked by disease 
germs, it marshals its army of phagocytes to kill them; 
when scratched or cut or wounded, it hurries the white 
corpuscles to the spot to try to build together new cells ; 
when the physical body is asleep and tenantless, with the 
owner away in his astral body in the astral world, it pulls 
up the bedclothes to cover itself against the cold, or turns 
over to rest in a new position. 

Many of these manifestations of the physical 
elemental are natural enough, and need not be interfered 
with by the consciousness of the tenant of the body; but 
sometimes such interference is necessary, as when there is 
work of danger to be done, and the elemental, fearing for 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 77 


its life, wants to run away, and yet must be held to its 
task by the will of the owner; or when a duty has to be 
performed and the body is tired and objects, and yet must 
be forced to work. A Master of the Wisdom says: “ But 
the body and the man are two, and the man’s will is not 
always what the body wishes. When your body wishes 
something, stop and think whether you really wish it. 
. . . When there is work that must be done, the physical 
body wants to rest, to go out walking, to eat and drink ; 
and the man who does not know says to himself: ‘ J want 
to do these things, and I must do them.’ But the man 
who knows says: ‘ This that wants is xot I, and it must 
wait awhile.’ Often when there is an opportunity to help 
some one, the body feels: ‘ How much trouble it will be 
for me; let some one else do it.’ But the man replies to 
his body: ‘ You shall not hinder me in doing good work.’”’ 
In children, the physical elemental is most pronounced ; 
when a baby cries and screams, it is the elemental, and 
not the soul of the baby, that gives expression to its 
objections, which, though reasonable to it, are often 
unreasonable to us. 

Q. But why does the real man want so many bodtes 
or vehicles? Can he not work without these coverings or 
garments ? 

Ans. These different garments are necessary for the 
development of the ego, because through these specialised 
organisms of matter alone is he able to receive vibrations 
to which he can respond, and thereby unfold his latent 
faculties. To acquire full consciousness in any given 
world, 1.¢., to perceive and respond to all vibrations ina 
world, he must make a connection with it through a 
garment of the matter of that world. There are different 
worlds or planes of nature, as explained before, and the 


78 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


real man wants different bodies to work in those different 
regions. Think of the different material vehicles a person 
requires to travel in by land, sea or air. On land he has 
to use a train or carriage of some sort; on water a ship is 
necessary, while in the air a balloon or an aeroplane is 
required. In these cases though the vehicle is changed 
to suit the requirements, the person himself remains 
the same. 

During our waking hours we work through our 
physical body, but in sleep we temporarily slip out of that 
body every night and go about in the astral world in the 
astral vehicle. When we die, we leave behind us for good 
the physical body and work in the astral plane with the 
astral body. Similarly, the mental and causal bodies are 
required for work—concrete and abstract thoughts—in 
the lower and higher mental planes respectively. Of 
course under the cover of these wrappings the light of the 
real man, the individual, is greatly obscured. Just as the 
light of a lamp appears dim and of a dull colour when we 
put a chimney, a globe and a coloured shade round the 
flame, so the real man, though a Spark from the great 
Flame which is God, appears quite different when clothed 
in SO many coverings, and shines out with more or less of 
his brightness according as the bodies he puts on consist 
of finer or coarser materials. 

Q. Tell me something about each of these bodtes. 
First, what is the causal body, and why is it so called ? 

Ans. The causal or the intellectual body, the body of 
Manas, the form aspect of the individual, of the true man, 
is the permanent vehicle of the ego in the higher mental 
world and consists of the matter of the first three sub- 
divisions of that world. Everything woven into it endures. 
It is the treasure-house in which are stored up all the 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 79 


experiences acquired during life in the three planes—the 
physical, astral and lower mental worlds. 

It is called the causal body because in it reside all 
the causes which manifest themselves as effects on the 
lower planes; because in it lies the cause of our slower or 
faster progress, as it is upon the treasure stored in this 
body that we have to depend for our character and ca- 
pacity each time we take a new birth on earth. When the 
individual takes on a new set of bodies for his next stay 
on earth, he draws from the storehouse of the causal body 
higher powers of heart and mind than were his during the 
last life, and during the new incarnation he will build up 
still higher qualities and pass them on to enrich his causal 
body. 

QO. What is the shape and use of the causal body ? 

Ans. This soul-body, so called because the soul of man 
—an individual and permanent Consciousness—lives in 
this body, is a human form, neither of man nor of woman 
with sex characteristics, but more of the angel of tradition. 
It is surrounded by an ovoid of fiery, luminous matter, yet 
delicate as the evanescent tints of the sunset. This form, 
called the Augoeides, and the ovoid of luminous matter 
surrounding it, make up the soul’s permanent habitation, 
the causal body; and in that body the soul lives, undying 
and eternal. 

To a clairvoyant this body appears as an ovoid 
surrounding the physical body and extending to a distance 
of some eighteen inches. In the early stage of a‘ young 
soul,’ or a primitive man differing little from the animal 
stage he has left behind, the causal body 1s small, almost 
colourless, resembling a bubble or a delicate film and grows 
very slowly. Its matter, the matter of the higher mental 
world, is not active until the advancement of the man 


80 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


gradually stirs it into alertness by vibrations from the lower 
bodies ; but when the man reaches the stage of abstract 
thought or unselfish emotion, the matter of the causal body 
being aroused into response, the rates of undulations show 
themselves in that body as colours, so that instead of being 
a colourless empty film it becomes a shining globe of light, 
full of glorious colours and delicate hues, flashing out rays 
of love and helpfulness in all directions. 

As the man begins to develop in spirituality, or 
even higher intellect, the real individual—the ego—begins 
to have a persisting character of his own, apart from that 
moulded in each of his personalities in turn by training 
and surrounding circumstances: and this character shows 
itself in the size, colour, luminosity and definiteness of the 
causal body just as that of the personality shows itself in 
the mind-body, except that this higher vehicle is naturally 
subtler and more beautiful. In the case of a pupil who has 
made some progress on the Path of Holiness, the causal 
body is a sight wonderful and lovely beyond all earthly 
conception, while that of an Adept (or Master) is a 
magnificent sphere of living light, whose radiant glory no 
words can ever tell. 

The colours in the body also are significant. The 
vibration denoting the power of unselfish affection shows 
itself as a pale rose-colour ; that indicating high intellec- 
tual power is yellow; that expressing sympathy is green ; 
blue betokens devotional feeling, while a luminous lilac- 
blue typifies high spirituality. 

Q. But a man in the course of his evolution acquires 
undestrable qualities also. Do they pass into this causal 
body, toa ? 

Ans. No. Such qualities as pride, sensuality, irrita- 
bility, are also reducible to vibrations, but, being vibrations 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 8x 


of the lower subdivisions of their respective worlds, 
they cannot pass on to the causal body, as it is built of the 
matter of only the three higher subplanes of the mental. 
He can build nothing but good qualities into his ego. The 
evil qualities are but the play of the lower bodies when 
those bodies are not controlled by the ego. They are thus 
negative, and represent a lack of development in the 
causal body. As the ego gains in strength, the activities of 
body and mind that we call evil diminish, and they 
disappear entirely when the causal body is perfect and 
the man reaches the end of his earthly pilgrimage of births 
and deaths. 

The difference between the causal body of a savage 
and that of an advanced man of saintly wisdom is that the 
first is an empty colourless bubble, extending a little beyond 
the physical bedy, while the second is a globe of brilliant 
light and dazzling radiance which may extend to a a radius 
of a hundred yards or so. 7 

QO. How can we help on the growth of our causal 
body ? 

Ans. There is not much to be done by direct action, but 
working at the improvement of the lower bodies and the 
building up of a pure and noble character will improve the 
causal body and cause it to grow. In it the man deals 
with abstractions and knows truth by intuition, not 
reasoning. It is therefore fed and devcloped by abstract 
thinking, such as the higher mathematics and deep scien- 
tific and philosophical imagination, by strenuous medita- 
tion, by the yoking of intellect to service, by unselfish love 
and self-sacrifice. This body attains enormous dimensions 
—about a mile in radius—in an Adept, while the Lord 
Buddha is said to have had a causal body extending to 
three miles all round. 

1 


82 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


QO. Now what is the mental body and what is its 
function 7? 

Ans. The mental body is built of the matter of the 
lower mental world, that is, the four lower subplanes of 
the mental plane. It expresses the concrete thoughts of 
the man or answers by its vibrations to the changes of 
thought in him. It is the vehicle of the ego, who is the 
Thinker, for his reasoning work, for his manifestation as 
intellect, and varies greatly in different people. It is oval 
in outline, interpenetrating the physical and astral bodies, 
surrounding them with a radiant atmosphere as it develops. 

The size and shape of this body depend on those of 
the causal body. The mind body literally grows in size 
with the advancing evolution of man. In an unevolved 
person it is so little developed that it is even difficult to 
distinguish it; but in a more advanced man, one who is 
not spiritual but who has only developed the faculties of 
his mind and trained his intellect, the mind body is seen as 
a definitely developed and organised vehicle of activity 
with a clear outline and full vigour. 

The colours in this and the astral body have the 
same significance as in the causal body, but as we approach 
the physical matter, the hues are grosser by comparison, 
less delicate and less living, while we also find some addi- 
tional colours in the lower bodies. We see the thought of 
pride as orange, irritability as brilliant scarlet, avarice as 
bright brown, selfishness as grey-brown and deceit as grey- 
green. Again, the good qualities of affection, devotion and 
intellect may be tinged by selfishness, and are then scen as 
impure and muddy owing to their distinctive colours being 
mingled with the brown of selfishness. There are in the 
higher vehicles additional colours of which we can form no 
idea in the physical world. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 83 


QO. How does the mind body grow ? 

Ans. It grows by thought, by study, by the exercise of 
good emotions, aspirations and beneficent endeavours, 
and by regular, strenuous meditation. Our thoughts are 
the material we build into the mind body, and by the use 
of artistic powers and higher emotions we literally build 
the mind body day by day. If we do not exercise our 
mental faculties, but constantly accept thoughts from 
outside instead of forming them from within, our mind 
body cannot grow. When a man uses his mental body, it 
not only vibrates for the time more rapidly, but tempo- 
rarily swells and increases in size. By a prolonged thought 
this increase becomes permanent, while the chdracteristics 
built by good and useful thoughts into the mental body 
are handed on to the permanent causal body to be carried 
over for future incarnations, enabling the man to obtain a 
more highly developed mind body in the next incarnation, 
with those qualities showing themselves as innate faculties. 
Good thoughts produce vibrations in the finer matter of 
the body, which by its specific gravity tends to float in the 
upper part of the ovoid ; whereas bad thoughts, such as 
selfishness and avarice, are oscillations of the grosser 
matter, which tends to gravitate towards the lower part of 
the ovoid. Consequently, the ordinary man who frequently 
yields himself to selfish thoughts of various kinds tends to 
expand the lower part of his mental body, which thus 
appears like an egg with its larger end downwards. On 
the other hand, the man who has devoted himself to higher 
thoughts and repressed the lower ones, expands the upper 
part of his mental body, and therefore presents the appear- 
ance of an egg standing on its smaller end. The subject 
of the power and use of thought will be dealt with ina 
separate chapter. 


84 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Q. Why have some persons a head for mathematscs, 
while others are unable even to add correctly ? Why do 
some persons understand and appreciate music, while 
others do not know one tune from another ? 

Ans. In the mental body there are certain striations 
which divide it into irregular segments, each corresponding 
to a certain department of the phvsical brain, so that 
each type of thought has to function through its duly 
assigned portion. The mental body of the ordinary man 
being not fully developed, a great many of the special 
departments in him are not yet in activity, and any 
attempt at thought belonging to those departments has to 
travel round through some inappropriate channel which 
happens to be fully open. The result is that his thought 
on these subjects is clumsy and uncomprehending. 

From a study of the colours and striations ina 
man’s mental body, the clairvoyant can perceive his 
character and the progress he has made in his present life. 
From similar features of the causal body he can see what 
progress the ego has made since Its original formation 
during individualisation. 

QO. What ts the function of the astral body ? 

Ans. Built of the matter of the seven substates of the 
astral world, this is the body of man’s Kamic conscious- 
ness, the seat of all animal desires, the centre of the senses 
where all sensory impressions become sensations, the 
vehicle of passion and inferior emotion in man. In size 
and shape it is like the two higher bodies, the mental and 
the causal, just described. Every one is constantly working 
through the astral body, but few work in it separate from 
the physical. In an undeveloped person this body presents 
a very inchoate appearance with its outline undefined and 
its material dull, coarse and ill-arranged, resembling a 





THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 85 


rolling cloud of unpleasant colours. When withdrawn 
from the physical body, as in sleep, it is a mere shapeless 
shifting cloud, unfit to act as an independent vehicle; but 
in a man of intellectual culture and spiritual growth it 
shows the progress of the owner by the definiteness of its 
outline, the luminosity of its materials, and the perfection 
of its organisation. 

The colours in the astral body bear the same mean- 
ing as those of the higher bodies, but are several octaves 
of colour below them; while that body has also additional 
colours expressing less desirable feelings in man which can- 
not show themselves in the higher vehicles. For example, 
black shows malice and hatred ; deep heavy grey signifies 
depression, while a livid pale grey indicates fear. Sensual- 
ity is shown by the presence of a lurid browntsh-red 
colour ; scarlet flecks in the astral body indicate irrita- 
bility, while jealousy is seen as a peculiar brownish-green, 
its extreme activity being shown by bright scarlet flashes 
of anger which pierce it. 

When the astral body is comparatively quiet (it is 
never actually at rest), the colours seen in it indicate those 
emotions to which the man is most in the habit of yielding 
himself. But when the man is experiencing any particular 
feeling, the rate of vibration which expresses the feeling 
dominates for a time the entire astral body. For example, 
if it be devotion, the whole of his astral body is flushed 
with blue, and so long as the emotion remains at its 
Strongest, the normal colours appear faintly through a veil 
of it; but when the vehemence of the sentiment dies away, 
the normal colours re-assert themselves. But because of 
this spasm of emction that part of his astral body which 
is normally blue has been increased in size. Thus a man 
frequently feeling high devotion soon comes to have a 


86 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


large area of blue permanently existing in his astral 
body. 

QO. How can we improve the astral body so that it may 
cease to vibrate in answer to the lower impulses and begin 
to answer to the higher influences of the astral world ? 

Ans. As the astral body lies between the physical and 
mental bodies, its improvement hinges on the one side on 
the purification of the physical body, and on the other on 
the purification and development of the mind. Being 
composed of the matter of the seven subplanes of the 
astral, the greater the proportion of finer astral matter it 
has in each subplane, the purer it becomes and the better 
is it fitted to act as a vehicle of consciousness and to travel 
long distances when separated from the physical body 
during sleep. 

Astral matter is peculiarly susceptible to impressions 
from thought as it responds more readily than physical 
material to every impulse of thought, strong thought taking 
a covering of astral matter and persisting as an entity for 
a long time. So the astral body thrills in answer to every 
thought that strikes it, whether the thoughts come from 
within the mind of the owner, or from without, from the 
minds of other men, and changes its colour continuously 
as it vibrates under thought impacts. If thoughts are high 
and noble, they demand finer mental matter and conse- 
quently finer astral matter in the astral body to respond to 
them. The astral body thus has to lose grosser and denser 
particles from each subplane and gain finer and rarer 
kinds, and thus become pure. Again, the pure astral body 
attracts to itself pure thoughts like a magnet, and these 
in their turn react on it and make it purer. 

The astral body is also affected by the purity or 
impurity of the physical body. If we unwisely build into 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 87 


our body coarse physical particles of an impure kind by 
including in our diet animal flesh, alcoholic drinks or 
narcotic drugs and other foul and degrading articles, we 
attract to ourselves correspondingly impure types of astral 
matter. On the other hand, by feeding on clean food and 
drink we not only improve our physical vehicle, but also 
purify the astral body by taking from the astral world 
delicate and fine materials for its construction. With all 
the three bodies thus purified, new possibilities open up 
before the man, and knowledge gradually flows into him, 
a wider universe unfolding on every side. 

Q. Is there any change in the astral body during sleep ? 
What are tts respective functions during the waking and 
sleeping states of man ? 

Ans, Studying a person when awake and when asleep 
we find a marked change in his astral body. When 
awake, astral activities—changing of colours, etc.— 
manifest themselves in and around the physical body; 
but when he is asleep, the astral body slips out and floats 
with the real man inside it in the air, above the physical 
body lying in the bed. In a person of undeveloped type 
the separated astral body is a shapeless mass with an 
irregular outline resembling a rolling cloud of unpleasant 
colours. It cannot go far from the physical body and is 
useless as a vehicle of consciousness. The man within it 
is in a dreaming condition, almost as much asleep in his 
astral body as in his physical. If anything should occur 
to drive it from its physical partner, the latter will awaken 
and the astral will quickly re-enter it. The astral body 
of an average man in sleep assumes the likeness of the 
physical. Such a.nan, however, cannot work consciously 
on the astral plane. In his astral body he drifts toward 
persons to whom he is attracted, but his attention is turned 


88 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


inwards, and he communes with his friends mentally only. 
At a stage a little higher, his mind is very active and 
receptive, and can work out problems presented to it more 
easily than in the physical body, when, it is said, “ sleep 
brings counsel”. But a pure and self-controlled man who 
shows an earnest desire for service to his fellow-men in 
the physical world and who has his astral body fully 
evolved and properly organised by moral and mental 
activities, is often ‘‘ awakened ’’ in the astral world bya 
more advanced person—usually a pupil of a Master—who 
induces him to turn his attention outwards, to wake up to 
his astral surroundings and attend to what is going on 
around him instead of merely remaining immersed in 
thought. In the case of such a developed person who is 
trained and is accustomed to function in the astral world, 
the man himself in his astral body ts in full consciousness 
when that body slips out of his physical during sleep. 
His astral body is clearly outlined and definitely organised, 
bears the likeness of the man and can be fully utilised as 
a vehicle in which he can work more actively and more 
conveniently than in his physical body, and can travel any 
distance with great freedom and rapidity without disturb- 
ing the physical body. Of course, as is most often the 
case, if the man has not learned to link his physical and 
astral bodies, there will be a break in his consciousness and 
he will not be able to remember the things done during 
his sleep. 

Q. We know everything at least about the physical 
vehicle through Western science. Has Theosophy anything 
to add to our knowledge ? 

Ans. The physical plane having seven subplanes as 
explained before in Chapter II, the physical vehicle is 
composed of the matter of all those states. The ordinarily 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 89 


visible physical body, Sthula Sharira, has matter of the 
three lower sub-planes, #.e., solid, liquid and gaseous, while 
the matter of the four ethers composes what is called 
the etheric double or Chhaya Sharira (shadow body). 
Both these function together on the physical plane 
for one physical life, and are cast aside by the man 
at death. 

The body exists for us, not we for the body. It is 
an instrument to be refined and improved, and also trained 
and made of such constituents as may fit it to be a vehicle 
on the physical plane for the highest purposes. One of its 
peculiarities is that once it gets accustomed to working 
along particular lines, it will continue to follow those lines 
of its own accord. If a bad habit be required to be 
changed, the body will first offer considerable resistance, 
but if it be compelled to alter it and be forced to act as 
the man desires, then after a time it will, of its own accord, 
repeat the new habit imposed on it and contentedly pursue 
the new method as it pursued the old one. The reason of 
this is the unconscious memory of the cells in the physical 
body, as explained in Chapter I in connection with 
vegetarianism. 

The human organism is made up of innumerable 
living bodies called * cells,” each of which has a conscious 
life of its own, and all combine to make the body a single 
whole. 

Q. How can you say that cach cell has a life or con- 
sctousness of its own ? 

Ans. There are several kinds of consciousness in the 
body; one is the “ I’ consciousness which manifests through 
the body as an organism ; another is the purely physical con- 
sciousness which may be the physical elemental, mentioned 
before, and which is the aggregate of the consciousness 


90 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


of the individual cells. The selective action of the cells 
in taking from the blood what they want and rejecting what 
is not wanted is an instance of this self-consciousness of 
the cells, and so is also what is called by physiologists the 
‘“unconscious memory of the cells’’. Science tells us 
that our physical body is made up of innumerable tiny 
“lives ’”’ or cells, and that these are continually changing, 
some passing out from us to the world around, and others 
being taken in, in their place, to form part of our body, so 
much so that no man has, at any moment, in his physical 
lody one particle of the matter of which it consisted seven 
years before. According to Occult Science not only are our 
own bodies, but also the bodies of animals, plants and even 
minerals, built of such living particles (including bacteria, 
microbes, etc.), some of which are so tiny that they can 
only be seen under a powerful microscope. Each particle, 
whether organic or inorganic, is a life, and these build up 
the material and its cells. The recent experiments of 
Dr. J. C. Bose conclusively prove that both the mineral 
and the plant partake of the same life as the animal and 
the man. 

Q. Then is there life also in a piece of stone ? 

Ans. Certainly. But though each particle is a life, the 
ordinary man calls a body living when the movement of 
its particles is so rapid as to be visible to him through his 
senses. When this movement is not so visible, he calls 
the body dead. But the fact that the movement in the 
stone is too subtle to be visible to the gross physical 
senses, is mo reason why the stone should be called 
inanimate. | 

QO. Then who dies at the time of the death of the man ? 
Is it the “I” manifesting through the body or ts it 
the particles which make up the cells of the body that die ? 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN Or 


Ans. Nothing really dies. A cell is an aggregate of 
lives as each particle which goes to the making up of the 
cell is a life; and even when the cell is broken up, these 
lives cannot be destroyed but go to the making up of other 
forms. Similar is the case with the whole body which is 
made up of innumerable cells, each with a life of its own; 
the combined life of all the cells making up the life or body- 
consciousness of the whole physical vehicle, which may be 
the physical elemental, spoken of before. All that takes 
place at death is that the “I” consciousness which was 
manifesting through the body during the man’s life on the 
physical plane merely slips out of that body; it cannot 
die, as the real man is immortal. The death of the physi- 
cal body occurs when, with the withdrawal of the life- 
energy, the many lives (microbes), kept under control in 
the form of the body by that life-energy, go their own 
separate ways, as the soldiers of an army disbanded by a 
General go their respective ways, and what we call decay 
sets in. The body is equally alive in both the cases that 
we call living and dead. When considered as living, it 
has a particular organised form controlled by the life- 
energy or Prana; when called dead, it is equally alive in 
the form of separate microbes, though owing to the with- 
drawal of the life-energy its outward form no longer 
persists. Our ordinary test of a living or dead thing 1s 
movement, and if the body were really dead, there should 
be no movement of putrefaction or the growth of hair on 
the body after the man had finally left that vehicle. 

QO. Now what is the etheric double ? 

Ans. The etheric double is so called as it is composed 
of the matter of the four ethers, t.e., the four finer sub- 
planes of the physical, and is an exact double or counter- 
part of the physical gross body, particle by particle, its 


92 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


shadow as it were. Because of this it is sometimes called 
Chhayad Sharira (shadow body). It is also sometimes 
spoken of as the wraith, the fluidic body or simply the 
double. It is faintly luminous and violet-grey in colour, 
interpenetrating the physical body and extending about 
one-fourth of an inch beyond its periphery. Its four 
ethers may mingle in finer or coarser combinations like 
the constituents of its denser counterpart; but the dense 
body and its double vary together in quality, so that if a 
man refines and purifies his physical body by pure food 
and drink, the etheric double becomes purified without 
any further effort. 

This invisible part of the physical body is the 
vehicle through which flow the streams of Prana or vital- 
ity which keep the body alive, and without it, as a bridge 
to convey undulations of thought and feeling from the 
astral to the visible denser physical matter, the ego could 
make no use of the cells of the brain. 

On the shape and build of the etheric double 
depend the shape and build of the physical body, so it is 
the mould of the latter body. All alterations in the 
physical body from youth to old age first occur in the 
etheric double before they pass on to the physical body, 
and if an etheric double be defective and of a certain 
shape with fine or coarse ethers for its constituents, the 
physical body will be built on that etheric mould, with 
similar defects and shape and composed of similarly fine, 
or coarse, dense particles. 

The observations of the N-rays, made by M. Jean 
Becquerel in the course of his study and communicated by 
him to the Paris Academy of Sciences early in the present 
century, show that animals under chloroform cease to 
emit N-rays, that these rays are never emitted by a 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 93 


corpse, that flowers and metals alike which normally give 
out these rays cease to emanate them under the action of 
chloroform. These N-rays are due to the vibrations in 
the etheric double, causing waves in the surrounding 
ether. Chloroform expels the etheric double, and hence 
the waves cease. At death the etheric double leaves the 
body, and the rays consequently can no longer be observed. 

QO. Why does one man obtain a beautiful ethertc 
double, and another a defective one ? 

Ans. Man evolves by reincarnation under the law of 
Karma as will be explained later on, and so receives 
different kinds of etheric doubles for different lives. He 
has for each life an etheric double just suited for the pur- 
pose of reaping in that life as he has sown in past lives. 
It enables him to acquire experience which is the neces- 
sary outcome of his good or bad actions, and a physical 
body being formed on that etheric mould, the man has to 
reap therein as he has sown. These two bodies ordinarily 
stay together. 

QO. If the physical body and tts etheric double have to 
stay together, are they dependent on each other for their 
existence ? 

Ans. Being a mould for the physical body, the etheric 
double comes into existence before its grosser counterpart, 
and follows its own line of quiet disintegration after the 
man leaves his physical body at death. It is separable 
from its physical counterpart although unable to go far 
from it. In normally healthy persons the separation is 
difficult and even unwholesome, though the double is torn 
out from its dense counterpart by anesthetics, and in 
diseased or defective bodies and in persons called material- 
ising mediums, it slips out without great effort and is seen 
by clairvoyants as an exact replica of the physical, united 


94 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


to it by a slender magnetic thread. It possesses vortices 
through which forces pour, and is the medium of the life- 
forces and their transmitter to its dense comrade. Apart 
from that comrade it is helpless and unconscious, a drifting 
cloud with force-centres, useless when there is nothing 
to which it can transmit the forces playing through it, and 
subject to manipulation from outside entities who can use 
it as a matrix for materialisation. 

Q. What becomes of the etheric double at the time of 
death ? 

Ans. Death means for the etheric double just what it 
means for the physical body—the breaking up of its con- 
stituent parts. It is the vehicle of vitality or Prana which 
animates the whole physical body. At the hour of death 
it oozes forth from the body, when it is seen by the 
clairvoyant as a violet light, or violet form, hovering over 
the dying man, still attached to the physical body by the 
slender thread already mentioned. Consciousness in the 
body then grows less and less vivid till at the death of the 
physical body the thread snaps, thereby breaking the last 
magnetic link between the dense body and the remaining 
principles of the human constitution. Being of physical 
matter the etheric double remains in the neighbourhood of 
the corpse and disintegrates slowly, its remnants being 
sometimes seen in graveyards as violet lights hovering 
over graves. It is better for several reasons to burn the 
dead than bury them, as will be explained in Chapter VI. 

Q. You spoke of the etheric double as the vehicle of 
Prana or vitality. What is that Prina ? 

Ans. In order that the physical body may live, it 
requires food for its digestion, air for its breathing, and 
vitality for its absorption. Vitality is essentially a force, but 
when clothed in matter it appears as an element existing 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 95 


in all the planes of nature. Vitality is a force coming 
originally from the sun, and everything and everyone is 
immersed in an ocean of that life, called Jiva or the solar 
life-principle, like fish in an ocean of water. Everyone 
appropriates this life, thence called Prana, the human life- 
principle or vital force; it is colourless, though intensely 
luminous and active, as it comes from the sun, and 
is not directly useful to the body for assimilation till 
absorbed through the etheric part of the spleen and 
specialised and transmuted into rose-coloured particles. 
The earth’s atmosphere is full of this force at all 
times, though specially active in brilliant sunlight. As 
blood circulates through arteries and veins, so does 
vitality flow along the nerves in tiny globules of lovely 
rosy light, the brain being the centre of his nervous 
circulation, and any irregularity in the absorption or flow 
of vitality at once affects the etheric double precisely as 
any abnormality in the flow of blood affects the physical 
body. When that vital force no longer flows along the 
nerves as in a limb benumbed by cold, or ts withdrawn 
by amesmerist by magnetic passes, there is no sensation in 
the limb, and what is called local anesthesia is produced. 

When the rosy nerve-ether—the rose-coloured 
particles—has been absorbed, the superfluous Prana finally 
radiates from the body in every direction as bluish-white 
light. In a healthy man the spleen does its work so 
generously that more vital force than is necessary is con- 
Sstantly radiating from the body in all directions. A man 
in perfect health, therefore, can impart some of it to an- 
other intentionally by mesmeric passes or otherwise, though 
unconsciously he radiates strength and vitality all around 
him. On the other hand when a man is unable through 
weakness or other causes to specialise a sufficient amount 


96 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


of this force for his own use, he unconsciously acts as a 
sponge and appropriates to himself the already specialised 
vitality of a sensitive person who is unfortunate enough to 
come near him and who feels an unaccountable weariness 
and langour afterwards. 

There lies the danger of healthy children sleeping 
by the side of weak and old persons, and the lassitude felt 
by persons attending spiritualistic séances without pre- 
cautions against the drain upon their vital force during 
manifestations is similarly explained. 

When that specialised Prana circulates in the body 
more rapidly than necessary, the man becomes excitable 
and hysteric. On the other hand when that vital force 
is not specialised in sufficient quantity or circulates 
very slowly in the body, the man feels langour and 
lassitude. 

Prina cannot be separated from the physical vehicle 
and its etheric double during life, and the three always 
stay together in the waking or sleeping state of man. 
When Prana ceases to circulate in any part of the body, 
that part dies with a local death in the body, (blindness, 
deafness, etc., are often thus produced,) and similarly, 
when it separates from the whole body, there is general 
death. This Prana should not be confounded with what is 
commonly called physical vitality measured by chemical 
actions in the body. These are the effects of Prana which 
is itself more analogous to electrical conditions and is the 
cause of chemical and other effects. 

Q. Is aman the same while asleep and while awake, or 
ts there any change during sleep ? 

Ans. While the man is alive and awake in the physical 
world, he is limited by his physical body, for he uses the 
astral and mental bodies only as bridges to connect himself 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 97 


with the physical. But that last named body soon becomes 
fatigued, and needs periodical rest; so the man leaving 
that body with its etheric double and Prana every night 
withdraws into the astral body which, so far as we know, 
does not get fatigued and needs no rest. 

The man thus liberated from his physical body in 
sleep can move about in the astral world in his astral body. 
The primitive savage does not go far from his sleeping 
body and has practically no consciousness during sleep, 
as explained before. All the cultured people belonging to 
the more advanced races of the world have at the present 
time their astral senses very fairly developed, so that if 
they were sufficiently aroused to examine the realities which 
surround them during sleep, they would be able to observe 
them and learn much fromthem. But in the vast majority 
of cases they are not so aroused, or “ awakened,” as 
stated before, and they spend most of their nights ina 
kind of brown study, pondering deeply over whatever 
thought may have been uppermost in their minds when 
they fell asleep. They have the astral faculties, but they 
scarcely use them; they are certainly awake on the astral 
plane, and yet they are not in the least awake fo the plane, 
and are consequently conscious of their surroundings only 
very vaguely, if at al]. But an advanced man can travel 
in his astral body wherever he likes and has full conscious- 
ness in the astral world, although he is generally unable 
to impress on his waking memory the events of his astral 
life during sleep. Sometimes when he does remember any 
incident, he calls it a vivid dream, though more often his 
recollections are hopelessly entangled with events of his 
waking life and impressions on the etheric brain. But with 
advancing evolution a time will come for every man when 
he will remember every incident of his astral life and will 

13 


98 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


have a continuous memory. (See “ Dreams” in this 
chapter.) 

QO. Ifaman leaves hts physical body during sleep every 
night as well as at death, does he die every night and come 
to life again every morn ? 

Ans. No. The physical body by itself would soon dis- 
integrate and could not be used asa vehicle unless there 
were with it the co-ordinating force of Prana acting through 
the etheric double. The physical body and its double 
can be compared to a coat and its lining. One must . 
out them on and off together, but once they are separated 
or torn apart, they cannot be put onagain. Therefore 
when during sleep a man goes to the astral world, he leaves 
his physical body together with the etheric double and 
Prana as a vehicle on the bed, and the real man comes 
out in the astral body taking with him his other bodies. 
But at the time of death only the physical body 
IS separated, and the whole man comes out of it 
in the etheric double, and then leaving that etheric 
double also after some time slips out of it in his astral 
body. Thus during sleep the real man with four princi- 
ples temporarily leaves the physical vehicle made up 
of the three lower principles, z.e., the physical body, 
etheric double and Prana, while at death only one 
principle, the physical body, is permanently separated 
from the rest of the man, z.e., from the other six 
principles. 

Q. You have fully explained the constitution of man, 
but you spoke of the seven principles of man. What are 
they ? 7 

Ans. Speaking in another way, man is called a sevenfold 
being, and has a septenary constitution, or is composed of 
seven principles. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 99 
NAMES OF PRINCIPLES 
1. Atma or Spirit. 


c 
| Buddhi or Intuition, or Vehicle 
Higher Triad 4 of Atma. 
L 
( 


~ 


Manas or Thinker or Intelli- 
gence. 


3 


4. Kama or Passional and emo- 
tional nature. 


, Prana or Vitality or Life- 
Lower Quaternary < energy. 

6. Etheric double, or -Vehicle of 

Prana. 

7. Physical body. 


These principles are, it will be observed, divided 
into two groups, one containing the three higher principles 
and called the Higher Triad, the deathless part of man’s 
nature, the spirit and soul of the Christian terminology ; 
and the other containing the four lower and therefore 
called the quaternary, the mortal or transitory part, the 
‘body’ of Christianity. 

Q. Please explain them a little in detail. The three 
lowest have already been explained, but what is Kama ? 

Ans. Kama literally means desire, and is the passional 
and emotional nature including all animal needs as hunger, 
thirst, sexual desire, etc., and also passions as love (in its 
lower sense), hatred, envy, jealousy, etc. It is the desire 
for experience of material joys, is the activity of conscious- 
ness corresponding to the astral body, is the grossest of all 
our principles and binds us fast to earthly life. It functions 
in Kama rupa (desire body) or the astral body which has 
been described before. 


IoO THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Q. What, now, ts Manas ? 

Ans. Manas, from the Sanskrit man, to think, means 
Thinker, (spoken of vaguely in the West as Mind,) and has 
in it the matter of the mental plane. It is the tenant in 
the house made up of the quaternary. We have already 
spoken of it as the Intelligence in man. It is the activity 
of consciousness corresponding to the mental and causal 
bodies. 

In each incarnation, the Manas is dual. It projects 
a part of its substance, the projection being called the 
lower Manas; and united to Kama as Kama-Manas, it 
becomes the normal human brain intelligence, the personal 
self of man. The quaternary as a whole is the personality 
spoken of before, and the higher Manas gives the individu- 
alising touch that makes the personality recognise itself 
as “I,” though the lower Manas makes the thought “ I 
am this,’ confusing the self with its personal vehicles. 

The heaven-aspiring mind, the higher Manas, with 
Buddhi and Atma is called the ego, as explained before. 
The lower Manas is engulfed in the quaternary, clasping 
Kama with one hand and retaining with the other its 
hold on its father, the higher Manas. The life problem 
of each incarnation is whether the lower Manas shall be 
dragged down by Kama and torn off from the higher 
Triad to which it belongs by nature, or whether it will 
successfully rejoin its ‘Father in Heaven,’—the higher 
Manas in the Triad—and carry with itself the experiences 
of its last life. It must be understood, of course, that 
these possibilities represent two extremes, and that in the 
case of the average man the lower Manas will partially 
aspire upwards and partially tend downwards. 

Q. What are the two higher principles, dima and 
Buddhi ? 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN Ior 


Ans. Atma, spoken of before as the spirit in man, is 
the most abstract part of man’s nature, the one reality 
which manifests on all planes, the essence of which all our 
principles are aspects. The One Eternal Existence rays 
forth as Atma, the very self alike of the universe and of 
man. It clothes itself in Buddhi, spoken of before as the 
Intuition in man. The latter has in it matter of the 
Buddhic plane and is the principle of spiritual discern- 
ment. Atma-Buddhi is a universal principle, but requires 
individualising to gather experience and attain self-con- 
sciousness, and so the mind principle is united to these 
two higher principles to form the ego. The four lower 
principles are common both to animal and man. 

QO. If the four lower principles are found both in 
animal and man, why do we see so great a difference 
between them ? 

Ans. Though Kama is manifest more or less even in 
animals, the difference between animal and man is due to 
the presence of the fifth principle, Manas, in man. Kama- 
Manas is the human soul, while Kama is the animal soul. 
So long as man is animated by Kama, by desires and by 
passions alone, he is ona level with the animals, because 
Kama has no higher consciousness ; and so long as Kama 
Is predominant, Manas cannot work, and the man acts 
like an animal. That is also the reason why a man ina 
violent passion is insensible to reason or advice. Through 
these principles the man comes into contact with different 
planes of nature. 

Q. How does he come into contact with those planes by 
means of his different principles ? 

Ans. Man comes into contact with things on the 
physical plane by means of his physical body or is con- 
scious of their existence with the aid of one or more of his 


I02 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


five physical senses ; similarly he comes into contact with 
higher planes by means of his other principles, and thus 
becomes conscious of their existence. Different planes do 
not occupy different places or different divisions of space, 
but interpenetrate one another. The same being the case 
with the different principles of man, to go from one plane 
to another is not like going from London to New York, 
but is merely to transfer consciousness from one to the 
other plane. For example, in the waking state, we are 
conscious of the pain of wounds in our physical body ; 
but when we are fighting with others in great excite- 
ment, we are not conscious of the physical pain of those 
wounds, as our consciousness is temporarily acting on the 
astral plane, though as soon as we cool down, we again 
become conscious of the pain. Similarly, a philosopher in 
deep thought forgets hunger and thirst, bodily comfort and 
disease, family and physical belongings, as well as anger 
and avarice, hate and love, and similar emotions and pas- 
sions, because he is for the time working on the mental 
plane. An ordinary man thus comes into contact with 
different planes in his waking life, though he goes to the 
astral plane temporarily every night during sleep. After 
death he spends a time first in the astral condition and 
afterwards in the mental, the latter being a specially 
guarded part of the mental world which is called Devachan. 
For each of these worlds he has a body or vehicle, as 
explained before. 

Q. The Seven Principles of Man have been explained, 
but how many bodies has he ? 

Ans. He has three immortal and three mortal bodies : 

The Atmic, the Buddhic and the Causal bodies are 

immortal, while the mental, the astral and the physical 
are mortal. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 103 


The Atmic body is but an atom of its own lofty 
world, the finest film of matter, an embodiment of Spirit. 
Into this body will pass the result of all experiences, the 
two lower bodies gradually merging themselves into it. 

The Buddhic or the Bliss body, sometimes called 
the Christ body by the Christians, is of the Buddhic world. 
It is fed by lofty and loving aspirations, by compassion and 
all-embracing tenderness. It has hardly begun to be formed 
in the majority of mankind. Its special characteristic is 
that: when it is formed and the consciousness of a man 
begins to be active in it, he loses the sense of separateness 
from all other individuals and understands the unity 
underlying al] manifestation. 

The third immortal body, the Causal body, as well 
as the three mortal bodies, the mental, the astral and the 
physical have already been described in detail. 

The man casts off his physical body at death, and 
the astral when he enters the heaven-world in his mental 
body. That mental body also disintegrates when he has 
finished his heaven-life and is clad only in his three immor- 
tal bodies which are subject neither to birth nor death. On 
descending for rebirth he takes on a new mental body as 
well as a new astral one, conformable to his character, and 
these attach themselves to his physical body, and the man 
then enters by birth a new period of mortal life. 

Q. What, now, are dreams, and how are they caused ? 

Ans. This question, so frequently asked, requires 
detailed study, but only a cursory explanation of the 
phenomena can be given here. The various branches of 
the subject may be arranged thus: first, to consider the 
mechanism, physical, etheric and astral, by means of which 
impressions are conveyed to our consciousness ; secondly, 
to see how the consciousness in its turn affects and uses 


r04 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


this mechanism ; thirdly, to note the condition both of the 
consciousness and its mechanism during sleep ; and fourthly, 
to enquire how the various kinds of dreams are thereby 


produced. 


I. THE MECHANISM 
(a) Physical 


There is in the body a great central axis of nervous 
matter, ending in the brain, and from this a network 
of nerve-threads radiates in every direction through the 
body. It is these nerve-threads, according to modern 
scientific theory, which by their vibrations convey all 
impressions from without to the brain, and the latter upon 
receipt of these impressions translates them into sensations 
or perceptions ; so that if a man puts his hand upon some 
object and finds it hot, it is really not his hand that feels, 
but his brain, which is acting upon information transmitted 
to it by the vibrations, running along its telegraph wires, 
the nerve-threads. 

All the nerve-threads of the body—those of the 
hand or foot or the bundle of them called the optic or 
auditory or olfactory nerves—are the same in constitution, 
though some of them have, through long ages of evolution, 
been specialised to receive and transmit to the brain most 
readily one particular set of rapid vibrations. 

The brain, which is the great centre of the nervous 
system, is very readily affected by slight variations in the 
general health of a man, and most especially by any which 
involve a change in the circulation of the blood through it. 
If too much blood is supplied to the brain, congestion of 
the vessels takes place; if too little, the brain (and 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 105 


therefore the nervous system) becomes first irritable and 
then lethargic. The blood as it courses through the body 
has two principal functions to perform—to supply oxygen 
and to provide nutrition to the different organs of the body. 
If the supply of oxygen to the brain be deficient, it becomes 
overcharged with carbon dioxide, and heaviness and 
lethargy very shortly supervene, as in a crowded and ill- 
ventilated room. Again, if the speed with which the blood 
flows through the vessels be too great, it produces fever ; 
if too slow, then again lethargy 1s caused. 

It is obvious, therefore, that the brain, through 
which all physical impressions must pass, may be easily 
disturbed in the due performance of its functions by causes 
apparently trivial, to which a man would pay no attention 
even during waking hours and of which he would be 
entirely ignorant during sleep. 

One peculiarity of this physical mechanism is its 
remarkable tendency to repeat automatically vibrations to 
which it is accustomed to respond. It is this property of 
the brain which is responsible for all bodily habits and 
tricks of manner which are entirely independent of the will, 
and are often so difficult to conquer ; and it plays an even 
more important part during sleep than it does during 
waking hours. 


(6) Etheric 


As the transmission of impressions to the brain 
depends rather upon the regular flow of Prana along the 
etheric portion of the nerve-threads than upon the mere 
vibration of the particles of their denser and visible portion, 
as 1s commonly supposed, it is obvious that any change in 
the volume or velocity of these life-currents will affect 

14 


106 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


the condition of the etheric portion of the brain and bring 
about hysteria, langour, lassitude, etc., as stated before. 
As the denser and etheric matters of the brain are both 
parts of one and the same physical organism, any 
irregularity in either will so dull or disturb the receptivity 
of the brain as to produce blurred or distorted images of 
whatever is presented to it. | 


(c) Astral 


The astral vehicle is even more sensitive to external 
impressions than the gross and etheric bodies, for it is 
itself the seat of all desires and emotions—the connecting 
link through which alone the ego can collect experiences 
from physical life. It is peculiarly susceptible to the 
influence of passing thought-currents, as explained in 
Chapter VII, and when the mind is not actively controlling 
it, it is perpetually receiving these stimuli from without, 
and eagerly responding to them. This mechanism also, 
like the others, is more readily influenced during the sleep 
of the physical body. 


2. THE EGo 


All these different portions of the mechanism are 
in reality merely instruments of the ego. The ego is 
himself a developing entity, and in the case of most men 
he is scarcely more than a germ of what he is to be one 
day, as explained for the causal body already and for 
The Evolution of Life in Chapter VIII. Therefore the 
grasp which this reincarnating ego has of his various 
instruments and, consequently, his influence over them, 
are naturally small in his earlier stages. Neither his mind 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 107 


nor his passions are thoroughly under his control. Con- 
sequently in sleep the different parts of the mechanism 
are very apt to act almost entirely on their own account 
without reference to him, and the stage of his spiritual 
advancement is one of the factors to be taken into account 
in considering the question of dreams. 

Again, what the vibrations of the nerve-threads 
present to the brain are mere impressions, and it is the 
work of the ego, acting through the mind, to classify, 
combine and rearrange them for the formation of our 
conceptions of external objects. For example, when a 
person looks out of the window, and sees a house and a 
tree, and instantly recognises them for what they are, 
the information really conveyed through his eyes and the 
nerve-threads to the brain is that in a particular direction 
there are certain varied patches of colour bounded by 
more or less definite outlines. It is the mind which from 
its past experience is able to decide that one particular 
small white object is a house and another rounded green 
One is a tree, and that they are both probably of such and 
such a size, and at such and such a distance from him. 
Thus mere vision is by no means sufficient for accurate 
perception, and the discrimination of the ego acting 
through the mind has to be brought to bear upon what 
is seen; furthermore, this discrimination is not an inherent 
instinct of the mind, perfect from the first, but is the 
result of the unconscious comparison of a number of 
experiences. 


3. CONDITION OF SLEEP 


In deep sleep, the physical body of a man with 
its etheric double and Prana lies quietly on the bed, 


108 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


while the ego, in the astral body, floats with equal 
tranquility just above it. 


(a) The Brain 


When the ego has for the time resigned the control 
of his brain, that brain does not therefore become entirely 
unconscious, as the physical body has a certain dim 
consciousness of its own—probably the physical elemental, 
spoken of before—quite apart from that of the rea] self, and 
apart also from the mere aggregate of the consciousness 
of its individual cells. The grasp of this consciousness 
working in the physical brain is far feebler than that of 
the man himself, and consequently, all the causes (quantity, 
quality and circulation of blood) which were mentioned 
before as likely to affect the action of the brain, are now 
capable of influencing it to a much greater extent. This 
is why indigestion, as affecting the flow of the blood, so 
frequently causes troubled sleep or bad dreams. 

But even when undisturbed, this strange, dim 
consciousness has many remarkable peculiarities. Its 
action seems to be to a great extent automatic, and 
the results are usually incoherent, senseless and hopelessly 
confused. 

It seems unable to apprehend an idea except in the 
form of a scene in which it itself is an actor, and therefore 
all stimuli, whether from within or without, are forth- 
with translated into perceptual images. It is incapable 
of grasping abstract ideas or memories as such; they 
immediately become imaginary percepts. For example, the 
idea of glory, suggested to that consciousness, could take 
shape only as a vision of some glorious being appearing 
before the dreamer. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 109 


Again, every local direction of thought becomes to 

it an absolute spacial transportation, so that, in absence of 
the discriminating ego to balance the cruder impressions, 
any passing thought suggesting Delhi and Bombay could 
image itself only as an actual instantaneous transportation 
to those places, and the dreamer would suddenly find 
himself there, never seeming at the time to feel any 
Surprise at startling transitions of this sort. 

Another source of the extraordinary confusion 
visible in this self-consciousness is the manner in which 
the law of association of ideas works in it. Every such 
association, whether abstract or concrete, becomes a mere 
combination of images; and as our association of ideas is 
often merely by syngronism, as of events which, though 
really entirely unconnected, happen to us in succession, 
it may be readily imagined that the most inextricable 
confusion of these images is of frequent occurrence. 

Another peculiarity of this curious consciousness 
of the brain is that while singularly sensitive to the slight- 
est external influences, such as sounds or touches, it yet 
magnifies and distorts them to an almost incredible degree. 
For example, the prick of a pin is magnified into a fatal 
stab received in a duel, while a slight pinch is translated 
into the bite of a wild beast. 


(b) The Etheric Brain 


This part of the organism, so sensitive to every 
influence even during waking life, is still more susceptible 
when in the condition of sleep. Clairvoyantly examined 
under these conditions, streams of thought are seen to be 
constantly sweeping through it—not its own thoughts, for it 
has no power to think—but the casual thoughts of others 


rio THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


which are always floating around us, as mentioned in 
Chapter VII; and in sleep, it is more than usually at the 
mercy of these thought-currents, since the ego is for the 
time in less close association with it. Again, it is noticed 
that when by any means these currents are shut out from 
the etheric brain, it does not remain absolutely passive, 
but begins very slowly and dreamily to evolve pictures for 
itself from its store of past memories. 


(c) The Astral Body 


As mentioned before, the appearance of this vehicle 
in which the ego is functioning during sleep, differs very 
greatly according to the stage of development of the ego. 
But in every case, this body is, as ever, intensely impres- 
sionable by any thought or suggestion involving desire. 


(d) The Ego in Sleep 


Much as the condition of the astral body during 
sleep changes as evolution goes on, that of the ego 
inhabiting it changes still more. Where the former is in 
the stage of the floating wreath of mist, the ego is 
practically almost as much asleep as the body lying 
below him and is blind to the sights and deaf to the 
voices of his own higher plane. If a man in this 
primitive condition remembers anything at all of what 
happens to him during sleep, it will almost invariably 
be the result of purely physical impressions made 
upon the brain either from within or from without—any 
experience which his real ego may have had being 
forgotten. Sleepers may be observed at all stages from 
this condition of blank oblivion, up to full and perfect 


‘ THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN IIT 


consciousness on the astral plane, though the latter is 
naturally comparatively rare. Even a man who Is suffi- 
ciently awake to meet with important experience in this 
higher life, may yet be unable so far to dominate his brain 
as to check its current of inconsequent thought pictures 
and impress upon it what he wishes it to recollect, and 
may thus have on awakening a most confused memory or 
no memory at all of what has really happened to him. 

But whether he remembers anything when physi- 
cally awake or not, the ego who is fully or even partially 
conscious of his surroundings on the astral plane, is 
beginning to enter into his heritage of powers transcending 
any that he possesses down here; for his consciousness 
when thus liberated from the physical body has very 
remarkable possibilities. 

He has a transcendental measure of time and space, 
i.¢é., his measure of time and space is so entirely different 
from what we have in waking life that from our point of 
view it seems as though neither time nor space existed for 
him. An illustration may be given of the story of a man who 
was awakened by the firing of a shot, which yet came in 
as the conclusion of a long dream, in which he had become 
a soldier, had deserted and suffered terrible hardships, had 
been captured, tried, condemned and finally shot—the 
whole Jong drama being lived through in the moment of 
being awakened by the sound of the shot. 

Another remarkable peculiarity of the ego is his 
faculty or habit of instantaneous dramatisation. In the 
cases of the shot and the pinch mentioned above, the 
physical effect which awakened the person came as the 
climax to a dream apparently extending over a consider- 
able space of time, though obviously suggested in reality 
by that physical effect itself. Now the news of this physical 


IZ THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


effect, whether of sound or of touch, has to be conveyed 
to the brain by the nerve-threads, and this transmission 
takes a certain space of time, only a minute fraction of a 
second. But the ego, when out of the body, ts able to 
perceive with absolute instantaneity without the use of the 
nerves, and is consequently aware of what happens just 
that minute fraction of a second before the information 
reaches his physical brain, and in that barely appreciable 
space of time he appears to compose a kind of drama or 
series of scenes, leading up to and culminating in the 
event which awakens the physical body. 

Another result which follows from the ego’s super- 
normal method of time-measurement is that in some 
degree prevision is possible to him; he foresees at times 
events that will be of interest or importance to his lower 
personality, and makes more or less successful endeavours 
to impress them upon it. 

Again, the ego when out of the body during sleep 
appears to think in symbols, so that what down here 
would be an idea requiring many words to express it, is 
perfectly conveyed to him by a single symbolical image. 
Such a thought or symbol, when remembered in the waking 
consciousness of course needs translation. Often the 
mind duly performs this function, but sometimes the 
symbol is recollected without its key, and then confusion 
arises. Most dreamers agree that to dream of deep water 
signifies approaching trouble, and that pearls are a sign 
of tears. 


4. DREAMS 


It is thus seen that the factors in the production of 
dreams may be: 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 113 


1. The ego, in any state of consciousness from utter 
insensibility to perfect command of his faculties, and with 
possession, in the latter condition, of certain powers far 
transcending those that he possesses in his ordinary waking 
state. 

2. The astral body, ever palpitating with the wild 
surgings of emotion and desire. 

3. The etheric brain, with a ceaseless procession of 
disconnected pictures sweeping through it. 

4. The physical brain, with its infantile semi-con- 
sciousness and its habit of expressing every stimulus in 
pictorial form. 

Of course, real dreams are actual experiences, which 
have occurred to the ego on the astral or higher planes, 
when wandering away from his sleeping physical body. 


(a) The True Viston 


This is a case where the ego either sees for himself 
some fact upon a higher plane of nature, or else has it 
impressed upon him by a more advanced entity. He is 
made aware of some fact which it is important for him to 
know, or perhaps sees some glorious vision which encour- 
ages and strengthens him. 


(6) The Prophetic Dream 


This, too, must be attributed exclusively to the 
action of the ego, who either foresees for himself or is told 
of some future event for which he wishes to prepare his 
lower consciousness. Sometimes the event is one of serious 
moment, such as death or disaster, while often the 


prophecy is evidently intended as a warning. 
18 


114 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


(c) The Symbolical Dream 


This also is the work of the ego and might be called 
a less successful variant of the preceding class, for it is 
after all an imperfectly translated effort on his part to 
convey information as to the future. 


(4) The Vivid and Connected Dream 


This is sometimes a remembrance of a real astral 
experience which has occurred to the ego while wandering 
away from his sleeping physical body ; more frequently it 
is the dramatisation by that ego, either of the impression 
produced by some trifling physical sound or touch, or of 
some casual idea which happens to touch him. 


(e) The Confused Dream 


This, the commonest of all, may be caused in 
various ways. It may simply be a more or less perfect, 
recollection of a series of the disconnected pictures and 
impossible transformations produced by the _ senseless 
automatic action of the physical brain: it may be a 
reproduction of the stream of casual thought which has 
been pouring through the etheric brain: if sensual images 
of any kind enter into it, it is due to the ever restless tide 
of earthly desire, probably stimulated by some unholy influ- 
ence of the astral world: it may be due to an imperfect 
attempt at dramatisation on the part of an undeveloped 
ego: or it may be, and most often is, due to an inextricable 
mingling of several or all of these influences. 

Q. You have explained how dreams are caused, but 
can you give some practical suggestions as to how to 
remember them 7 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 1x5 


Ans. Some people, in whom the ego is undeveloped 
and earthly desires of various kinds are strong, never 
dream at all; many others are now and then, under a 
collocation of favourable circumstances, able to bring back 
a confused memory of nocturnal adventure. But if a man 
wishes to reap in his waking consciousness the benefit of 
what his ego may learn during sleep, it is absolutely 
necessary for him to acquire control over his thoughts, 
subdue all lower passions, and attune his mind to higher 
things. 

When a man leaves his body at night, he remembers 
all that he did the night before and during the day—in 
fact, he has the whole of his present waking memory, plus 
that of his nightly astral life. The astral memory includes 
the physical, but his physical brain does not remember the 
astral experience, for the simple reason that it had no 
share in it. 

A special link must be made, or rather an obstacle 
must be removed, in order to bring the memory through 
into the physical brain. In the slow course of evolution 
the power of perfect memory will come to every one, so 
that there will no longer be any veil between the two 
planes. 

If a man enters the state of sleep with his thought 
fixed upon high and holy things, he thereby draws 
round him the elementals (see Chapter VII) created 
by like thoughts in others; his rest is peaceful, his mind 
open to impressions from above and closed to those from 
below, for he has set it working in the right direction. If, 
on the contrary, he falls asleep with impure and earthly 
thoughts floating through his brain, he attracts to himself 
all the gross and evil creatures who come near him, while 
his sleep is troubled by the wild surgings of passions and 


116 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


desires which render him blind to the sights, and deaf to 
the sounds, which come from higher planes. Thus through 
what seem at first but the portals of dream, entrance may 
perchance presently be gained into those grander realms 
where alone true vision is possible. 

Sometimes a man may wake in the morning with a 
strong feeling of elation and success, without in the least 
being able to recall in what he has succeeded. This 
generally means some good piece of work well done, but it 
is often impossible for the man to recover the details. At 
other times he may bring back with him a feeling of 
reverence, and this means that he has seen a vision and has 
been in the presence of some one much greater than 
himself. Sometimes, on the other hand, a person may 
wake with a feeling of terrible fear. That is sometimes 
due only to the alarm of the physical body at some 
unaccustomed sensation; but it is sometimes also due to 
having encountered something horrible in the astral world. 
Or again, it may arise merely from sympathy with some 
astral entity who is in a state of terror, for it is a 
frequent thing on the astral plane that one person should 
be strongly influenced by sympathy with another’s 
condition. 

In coming back to the physical body from the astral 
world there is a feeling of great constraint, as though one 
were being enveloped in a thick, heavy cloak. The joy of 
life on the astral plane is so great that physical life in 
comparison with it seems no life at all. Many men who 
can function in the astral world during the sleep of the 
physical body regard the daily return to the physical world 
as men often do their daily journey to the office. They do 
not positively dislike it, but they would not do it unless 
they were compelled. 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 117 


Nine persons out of ten, when in the astral body, 
thus do not at all like returning to the physical body, and 
few care whether the physical brain remembers or not. 
But if a man specially wishes to get into the habit of 
remembering, the procedure recommended is the following : 

1. As his last thought before he sinks to sleep is 
of immense importance, and affects him physically, 
mentally and morally, he should make a special point of 
raising his thoughts to the loftiest level of which he is 
capable, before allowing himself to sink into slumber, 
though, as stated before, he invariably ought to do this 
whether he wants to remember his astral experience or not. 

2. When he lies down to sleep, he should think 
of the aura (see end of this Chapter) which surrounds him, 
and will strongly that the outer surface of that aura shall 
become a shell to protect him from the impingement of 
influences from without—from the turbid current of the 
thoughts of others—and the auric matter will obey his 
thought: a magnetic shell will really be formed around 
him, and the outside thought-stream will be excluded, 
even though his etheric brain may go on evolving pictures 
(from within) for itself. 

3. When he is out of the body, he should first 
try to remember that he is in the astral world. 

4. Then, to make the link between the physical 
and the astral memory, he should remember (when out 
of the body) that he wishes to do so, and that it would 
be a comfort to the physical consciousness if memory 
could be carried through. 

3. Then he must determine to come back into 
the body slowly, instead of with a rush and a little 
jerk, as is usually the case; it is this jerk which prevents 
him from remembering. 


118 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


6. He should stop himself and say, just before he 
awakes: ‘“ This is my body; I am just about to enter 
it. As soon as I am in it, I will make it sit up and write 
down all it can remember.” Then he should enter it 
calmly, sit up instantly and write down all he might be 
able to remember at once. If he waits a few minutes, all 
will usually be lost. But each fact that he brings 
through will serve as a link for other memories. The 
notes may seem a little incoherent when he reads them 
over afterwards, but he should not mind that; it is 
because he is trying to give an account in physical words 
of the experiences of another plane. In this way he 
will gradually recover the memory, though it may take 
a long time. 

He should be systematic in his efforts. Every time 
that he succeeds in bringing something through, it will 
make it easier to remember next time, and will bring 
nearer the period when there will be habitual automatic 
recollection. At present there is a moment of unconscious- 
ness between sleeping and waking, and this acts as a veil. 
It is caused by the closely-woven web of atomic matter 
through which the vibrations have to pass. 

Q. Can we recognise a friend or acquaintance tn the 
astral or the mental world by his appearance tn the absence 
of his physical body ? 

Ans. The shape of all the higher bodies is no doubt 
ovoid, but the matter composing them is not equally dis- 
tributed throughout the egg. In the midst of this ovoid 
is the physical body. The physical body strongly attracts 
astral matter which in its turn strongly attracts the mental. 
Therefore by far the greater part, .c., about ninety-nine 
per cent, of the matter of the astral body, is compressed 
within the periphery of the physical frame, and the same 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN 119 


holds good for the mental body. If we see the astral body 
of a man in its own world, apart from the physical body, 
we shall still perceive the astral matter aggregated in 
exactly the shape of the physical, although, as the astral 
matter is more fluidic in its nature, what we see is a body 
built of dense mist, in the midst of an ovoid of much finer 
mist. The same is true of the mental body. Therefore, 
if in the astral or the mental world we should meet an 
acquaintance, we should recognise him by his appearance 
just as instantly as in the physical world. 

Q. But what is the aureola seen sometimes in pictures 
round the heads of satnts ? 

Ans. Every human being is surrounded by a luminous 
cloud, called the aura, a subtle portion of fine matter 
extending all round the physical body to a distance of 
eighteen to twenty-four inches. It is oval in shape, hence 
is sometimes spoken of as the auric egg, and has no well- 
defined outline, its edges gradually fading into nothingness. 
Part of that aura, more developed for a saint, is shown as 
a circle of rays round the head of the portrait and is called 
the aureola or glory. Not alone around the human body but 
also around animals, trees and even minerals, the aura is to 
be seen as a cloud of light surrounding or emanating from 
them, though less extended or complex than that of man. 

The human aura consists of matter in different states, 
and five of its component parts are visible to a clairvoyant 
sight, each, as it were, an aura in itself, occupying the 
entire space if the other four were withdrawn. 

The first, called the health aura, from the fact that 
its condition is greatly affected by the health of the 
physical man, is composed purely of fine physical matter, is a 
faint bluish-white, almost colourless, and for a healthy 
man is striated in appearance with a number of straight lines 


120 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


radiating from the body on all sides. These lines, rigid 
and parallel during health owing to the constant radiation 
of an abundance of life-force from the healthy body, become, 
during disease, erratic, confused and drooping like the 
stems of faded flowers. 

The second is called the Pranic aura as it consists 
of the matter of specialised Prana, constantly radiating 
from the body in all directions, and has a faint bluish-white 
hue, though the Prana circulating in the body has a rosy 
colour. It is to the radiation of the Pranic aura that the 
parallelism of the health aura is due. The Pranic aura is 
often spoken of as the magnetic aura and Is used in the pro- 
duction of many of the physical phenomena of magnetism. 

The third aura is that which expresses Kama or 
desire, #.¢., is the field of manifestation of Kama. From it 
is formed the astral body for the man to travel in the astral 
world during the sleep of the physical body. There is 
little of permanency about its manifestations, as its colours, 
brilliancy and rate of vibration are changing every moment; 
for example, a fit of passion will charge the whole of the 
aura with deep red flashes on a background of sooty black- 
ness, while a sudden fright will turn the whole into a 
palpitating livid grey mass. 

The fourth is the aura of the Jower Manas, the mani- 
festation of the personality. From this aura the mental 
body of the ordinary man is formed. It is also used to 
make what is called the maydvirupa, a body which func- 
tions on the mental plane, but brings its owner into touch 
with the astral at the same time, and is used on both these 
planes by Adepts and some of Their disciples and others 
who are able to form it. In this aura are seen beams of 
Spirituality and intellectuality, while strong desires habitu- 
ally repeated in the Kamic aura, setting up corresponding 


THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN [2r 


vibrations in this aura, produce there a permanent tinge of 
the same colour wherefrom the general disposition and 
character of a man can be read. This aura is thus the 
record of the progress of the personality, as explained 
before in the case of the mental body. 

The fifth aura, that of the higher Manas or Indi- 
viduality, not distinguishable round every person, is of incon- 
ceivable beauty and is in fact the causal body, the vehicle 
of the Reincarnating Ego, and shows by its condition the 
degree of his advancement since individualisation. 

The same colour significance obtains in all these 
auras, as explained before for the various bodies. 

When a man during sleep passes on to the astral 
plane in his astral body, he takes the lower and higher 
Manasic auras also with him, leaving behind with his 
physical body in bed the first two auras together with a 
pale residuum of the third not wanted in the formation 
of the astral body. Of course if he passes in a subtle 
vehicle to the higher mental plane, he leaves very much 
more behind him. 

A sixth and a seventh aura also exist, but no 
information about them Is at present available. 

These auras are not mere emanations, but are 


manifestations or expressions of the man on different 
planes. 


16 


CHAPTER IV 


REINCARNATION 


Question. What is reincarnation ? 

Answer. It is rebirth, the descent of the human soul 
into successive physical bodies. Each man has to pass 
through many lives, returning to earth again and again 
and dwelling each time in a different earthly body accord- 
ing to the Law of Karma whereby each one reaps 
whatever he has sown in previous lives. 

Q. But what is tt that retncarnates, and what ts the 
object of reincarnation ? 

Ans. Reincarnation, as far as the derivation of the word 
(ve, again, tn, into, and caro, flesh—gen. carnts) is con- 
cerned, means “repeated entering into physical or fleshly 
covering,’ and implies the existence of something relatively 
permanent that enters into something relatively imperma- 
nent. Man is a spiritual intelligence clothed in bodies of 
matter. That intelligence which has to unfold all his 
powers and divine capacities develops by descending into 
gross matter and then ascending again with the result of 
the experiences so obtained. It is the ego, :.c., the fifth 
principle, Manas, with the two higher principles, Buddhi and 
Atma, which assumes different bodies, though his natural 
dwelling place is in the higher and spiritual regions. He 
is not manifestly divine and has to learn to master matter 


REINCARNATION 123 


by long experience and many lessons. As a bird soaring 
in the air dives into water to catch his prey, and then rises 
again into his own habitat, so is it with the real man, the 
spiritual being belonging to the higher worlds, who plunges 
down to earth to gain the experience which is the nourish- 
ment for the Spirit’s unfolding and which he carries home 
with him for assimilation into innate capacities and powers, 
mental and moral. When the experience of one life is 
assimilated, he returns to the earth for another life, in order 
to gain more. 

He first comes to the earth and takes a body prepared 
for him, generally the body of a savage, to learn the first 
lessons of human experience. He then passes to the other 
side of death and learns by the lessons of pain the errors 
he has made, and by the lessons of enjoyment the right 
thoughts and feelings he has had, while during the latter 
part of that post-mortem life he assimilates what he has 
gathered on earth. When that experience is assimilated, 
he comes to earth again for further gain and enters a better 
body suited to his more unfolded condition. His real life 
thus covers millions of years, and what we commonly con- 
sider as his life is only a day in his life, as a life of about 
sixty years in this world is ordinarily succeeded in the 
higher worlds by a period of five to twenty times that 
length according to development. Each life isa day at 
School, and each time we return to earth, we resume our 
lessons where we have left off before, aided by what we 
have gained by home-study—study in heaven which is the 
home of the soul. The savage is just commencing his 
human education, while a spiritually developed man is 
nearing his graduation in this world-school. Some pupils, 
being apt, leavn quickly, while other egos are like dull boys 
who take a longer time to learn their lessons. No pupil 


124 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


ever fails, but the length of time he takes to qualify himself 
for the higher examination is left to his own discretion. A 
wise pupil, seeing that this school-life is merely a prepara- 
tion for a wider one, makes the best of his time and tries 
hard to master the rules of the school and shape his life in 
accordance with them. 

Q. But have we not sufferings enough in one life ? The 
thought of being reborn to suffer over and over agatn ts 
horrible. 

Ans. Dislike for, or lack of understanding the purpose 
of, existence does not alter facts. If suffering and sorrow 
were unknown in the world, would we not be filled with 
extreme pain to leave this land of bliss when the call of 
death came, and would we not in that case welcome re- 
incarnation ? Thus what we object to is not reincarnation, 
but the trials and sufferings of earthly life. But the diffi- 
culties and sorrows give us experience, teach us some of 
the grandest lessons of life and force us to develop 
powers which would otherwise never be awakened into 
activity. As will be explained later in Chapter V, 
we reap as we sow, Suffer in the present life for the 
misdeeds of the past, and none but ourselves can cause us 
suffering. 

Q. But ts tt not unjust for us to be punished for for- 
gotten misdeeds perpetrated long agoin a past life ? Why 
should a man suffer for what he ts not consctous of having 
done ? 

Ans. A man may suffer from a disease in ignorance of 
the conditions under which its germs were sown in his 
body, but the right sequence of cause and effect is not 
imperilled by his ignorance, for there is no such absurdity 
in the universe as an effect without a responsible 
cause. 


REINCARNATION 125 


Again, does forgetfulness of misdeeds destroy their 
consequences, and does he not equally enjoy the fruit of 
good deeds which he does not remember doing ? 

As a matter of fact, the real man, the ego, does not 

forget his misdeeds, but remembers them as we remember 
what we did yesterday, though the physical-brain memory 
of the new body does not recollect what was done in the 
body he wore in the last life. A boy stealing apples to-day 
requires punishment when caught the next day even though 
he may have put ona different suit of clothes. The ego 
that makes the Karma reaps the Karma. The labourer 
that sowed the seed gathers in the harvest, though the 
clothes in which he worked as sower may have worn out 
during the interval between the sowing and the reaping. 
The physical as well as the astral and mental garments 
of the ego have similarly fallen to pieces between seed-time 
and harvest, and he reaps in a new suit of clothes; but 
he who sowed also reaps, and if he sowed but little 
seed or seed badly chosen, it is he who will find a poor 
harvest when he goes forth as reaper. 

If we were to remember all our past misdeeds, we 
would be staggered by the painful vision of a past always 
full of weakness, even when free from the actual stain of 
crime; and if we knew that each one of our past errors, 
ever present before our eyes, would carry with it its punish- 
ment, would we not be haunted by fear at every step in 
our present life, and would not life be transformed into 
an endless torment out of all proportion to the actual sin ? 
Talking only of one life, many a criminal would go 
forward if only he could forget; but the memory of his 
crime is a fetter preventing his recovery and progress ; and 
how much happier many of us would be if we could forget 
much of the past of this one life. Not until we are strong 


126 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


enough to bear the memory of the present life without 
regret, remorse or anxiety, and above all without resentment, 
should we desire to add to that burden of one life the 
burden of a long millennial past. 

So it is a merciful Banker who saves us all the 
trouble of keeping accounts and, whenever we are ready 
to start a new ledger, strikes the balance and turns over 
our net proceeds with all accrued interest. 

Again, after death the soul, free from his illusory 
sheaths, makes an impartial review of the past, notes his 
errors and failures with their motives, and by knowledge 
thus gained grows in wisdom and in power, in intelligence 
and In conscience. 

QO. But why have we no memory of past lives? We 
remember whatever we have experienced and tf we have 
dived before, why should we forget ? 

Ans. First let us note the fact that we forget more of 
the present life than we remember. We do not remember 
learning to read, but the fact that we can read proves the 
learning. We avoid being burnt by fire, but do not 
remember at what particular time we first got burnt and 
learnt the lesson. Again, these events are not wholly 
forgotten; they are submerged, not destroyed, and may be 
drawn from the depths of memory, may be recovered from 
a person’s subconsciousness if he is thrown into a mesmeric 
trance. If this forgetfulness be true of experiences en- 
countered in our present body, how should we expect our 
present brain to remember experiences in which that brain 
and body had no share at all? Our causal and higher 
bodies remain with us throughout the whole series of 
incarnations, but the physical, astral and mental bodies 
fall away at each incarnation ; and when we are reclothed 
for a new life in three mortal bodies, those new bodies 


REINCARNATION 127 


receive from the reincarnating spiritual intelligence, not 
the detailed experiences of the past, but the qualities, 
tendencies and capacities made out of those experiences ; 
and our conscience, our instinctive response to emotional 
and intellectual appeals, our assent to fundamental prin- 
ciples of right and wrong, are traces of past experience. 
There are many unconscious memories, manifesting 
in faculty, in emotion, in power—traces of the past im- 
printed on the present and discoverable by observations on 
ourselves and others. We gain our physical bodies, 
according to our Karma, from our parents through what 
is called physical heredity; but the mentality that we 
have, as well as our very character, we have built up for 
ourselves. Each life we bring with us certain tendencies, 
which are the summed up memories of past lives; certain 
powers which are likewise the summed up activities of the 
past; and certain characteristics, certain faculties, which 
soon show themselves in the child, which tell us what we 
have done or have not done during earlier lives on earth. 
Hence memories of the past may be clear and definite, 
obtained by the practice of yoga—a system of training 
and discipline—or may be unconscious but shown by results, 
and closely allied in many ways to what are called instincts, 
by which we do certain things, think along certain lines, 
exercise certain functions, and possess certain knowledge 
without having consciously acquired it. In the researches 
of psychology to-day, many surges of feeling, driving a 
man to hasty, unpremeditated action, are ascribed to the 
subconscious, #.¢., the consciousness which shows itself in 
involuntary thoughts, feelings and actions; they come to 
us out of the far-off past, without our volition or our 
conscious creation. Our instincts are memories buried in 
the sub-conscious, influencing our actions and determining 


128 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


our choices; our moral instinct is Conscience, a mass 
of interwoven memories of past experiences, speaking with 
the authoritative utterance of all instincts, deciding on 
“right” and “ wrong” without argument or reasoning, 
and giving warning of dangers experienced in the past. 

Innate faculty—what is it but an unconscious 
memory of subjects mastered in the past ? Here-we have a 
proof of the accuracy of Plato’s idea that all knowledge is 
reminiscence. Having learnt a subject, ¢e.g., Mathematics, 
in this life and forgotten it for years, we can re-learn it 
very quickly as it is a mere traversing of old ground. 
Similarly, when a science or philosophy is quickly grasped 
and applied, or an art mastered without much study, the 
memory of past lives is there in power, though the facts of 
learning are forgotten. Thus it is that a man who had 
studied occultism in a past life, coming across Theosophy 
in this life, takes it up immediately as if resuming an old 
thread and makes rapid progress, while another studying 
it for the first time in this life does not go far. 

Again, when we feel at home with a stranger at the 
very first meeting, or fall in love at first sight, memory is 
there, the Spirit’s recognition of a friend of former lives, 
the call of Ego to Ego, old friends clasping hands in 
perfect confidence and mutual understanding. Similarly is 
memory present when we shrink with a feeling of repul- 
sion from an apparent stranger, which is but the recog- 
nition of an ancient enemy. 

Memory of past lives is, however, occasionally 
found in children having fleeting glimpses of their past life 
and sometimes remembering full details, especially if they 
died a violent death in the last life. Moreover, such 
memory can be gained, though the gaining requires a 
steady effort and prolonged meditation to control the ever 


REINCARNATION 129 


restless mind and to make it sensitive and responsive 
to the Spirit manifested as an ego, who alone stores 
all memories of the past; then the scenes of the past are 
recalled, old friends recognised, old links seen. The fact 
is that the ego has been through all these events, and has 
in the heaven-world after death worked up the experiences 
into faculties and character, into intellect and conscience. 
But only when a man reaches the memory of the ego and 
becomes one with him consciously, can he remember all in 
his new brain. 

No brain can store the memory with all the details of the 
events of numerous past lives, and even if it could, as mere 
details they would be worthless to a man who had to act 
on the spur of the moment. If each time we came near a 
fire, we had to remember all the pains of being burnt pre- 
viously, we should be burnt time after time before we could 
go through all the details of the past memories and deduce 
from them a line of conduct. But when these events are 
concreted into moral and mental judgments, they are 
available for immediate use. The memory of numerous 
murders committed would be a useless burden, though the 
instinct of the sanctity of human life is an effective memory 
of them. 

An elderly man is wiser and more intelligent than a 
young lad, because he has gained greater experience. 
Similarly, a civilised man is wiser than a savage because he 
has passed through more incarnations. 

Q. But it ts not always that an elderly man ts wiser 
and more intelligent than a boy; a civilised youth of 
twenty years ts more intelligent than a coolte of fifty. 

Ans. This only strengthens the theory of reincarnation. 
A boy of ten years and ten days is wiser than another boy 


of five years and fifty days, as days count nothing before 
17 


130 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


years. Similarly, because years count nothing before lives, 
a youth of twenty years and probably one thousand lives 
behind him must be wiser than a coolie of fifty years and, 
say, of only one hundred lives. But if we do not accept 
reincarnation, all children ought to be born with the same 
amount of intelligence, which is not the case. Reincar- 
nation alone explains the difference between them—the 
difference in their growth due to the different ages of the 
soul. 

Q. But if a negro boy be nurtured and trained in 
Europe, will he not be as intelligent and wise as a 
European boy ? 

Ans. If intelligence depended on education in youth, 
two children of the same parents, similarly trained and 
brought up, ought to be equally intelligent and equally 
wise or foolish. Not only is this not so, but very often it 
is just the reverse, as one brother is wise and virtuous, 
while the other is foolish and vicious. Again twins, un- 
distinguishable in their infancy, grow widely different in 
spite of similarity of training and education in all respects. 

The negro is bright up to a certain point, and then 
suddenly stops, to the disappointment of his teacher who 
thought he would go far. Reincarnation explains that a 
child comes into the world with a character, with qualities, 
characteristics, powers and deficiencies, that we may to 
some extent mould and modify that character, but that our 
powers in that respect are very limited. As Ludwig 
Buchner said: “ Nature is stronger than nurture.” 

Q. But the physical, mental and moral peculiarities of 
children come from the parents by the law of Heredity ; 
what wonder, then, that a European child ts intelligent 
and a negro one stupid ? Does reincarnation ignore that 
law 7? 


REINCARNATION I3r 


Ans. No; on the contrary it endorses that law on the 
physical plane. In providing physical bodies parents 
stamp them with their signet, and so the molecules in the 
child’s body carry with them the habit of vibrating in 
definite ways. Thus are hereditary diseases conveyed to 
children, and little tricks of manner and habits are also 
similarly transmitted. 

But transmission of mental and moral likenesses 
and peculiarities is true only within limits, and not to the 
extent taken for granted. Etheric atoms are contributed 
by parents like physical ones, as are also kamic elements, 
especially by the mother ; and these, working on the mole- 
cules of the brain, give to the child the passional charac- 
teristics of the parents, partly modifying the manifestations 
of the ego of the child. Reincarnation, while admitting 
all these parental influences on the child, goes further and 
states that there is an independent action of the ego, 
the inherent tendency of his nature, and thus gives 
a full explanation of differences as well as similarities. 
Heredity can explain only similarities, not differences. 

Again, heredity though explaining the evolution of 
bodies, throws no light on the evolution of intelligence 
and conscience, and later studies show that acquired 
qualities are not transmissible and that genius is often 
sterile. 

There are conspicuous violations of the law of 
Heredity which are easily explained by reincarnation, and 
the following cases prove the inadequacy of merely 
hereditary influences : 

1. Children of same parents, not equally in- 
telligent, nor of equal moral tendencies. 
| 2. The life-history of twins showing that two 
individuals born under precisely identical conditions and 


132 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


having exactly the same heredity often differ greatly in 
physique, intellect and character. 

3. The wide difference in character and intellect 
between father and son in spite of their physical resem- 
blance. 

4. The birth of geniuses in humble and com- 
monplace circumstances, furnishing abundant evidence 
that the individual] sou] outstrips the bonds of physical 
birth. 

5. Mediocre children of distinguished parents, 
Showing the inadequacy of hereditary influences in mental 
and moral powers and capacities. 

6. Profligates born to saintly parents. 

7. Saintly children born to profligates. 

8. Great moral geniuses, like Buddha, Zoro- 
aster, Jesus, etc., whose birth cannot be explained by 
heredity. 

9. Musical instinct or artistic tendency in one 
brother, without the other brother having even an ele- 
mentary notion of the art. 

All these cases can be satisfactorily and easily 
explained by reincarnation. 

Q. Can there not be special creation by God for each 
soul ? There can be three explanations of human tnequals- 
tses, of differences of faculties, opportunities and ctr- 
cumstances: the sctentific law of Heredity, spectal cre- 
ation by God,and Reincarnation. You have refuted the 
first ; what about the second ? 

Ans. The law of Evolution is accepted on all hands 
for everything except man. What begins in time, must 
end in time, and the idea of special creation involves the 
correlative of annihilation at death; but the spiritual 
intelligence called man is supposed to have no individual 


REINCARNATION 133 


past though it is admitted to have an endless future, 
which looks like a stick existing with one end only. 

A man’s character on which his whole destiny 
depends is, on this hypothesis, specially created for him by 
God and imposed on him without any choice of his own. 
If he is gifted with a noble nature and fine capacities, he 
may be thankful, though he has done nothing to deserve 
them. If he inherits a congenital disease, congenital 
criminality or evil nature, or if he is born a cripple or an 
idiot, he has equally done nothing to deserve them. 
Everything depends on mere chance, or on the whim or 
arbitrary will of God. But if this be so, where is the 
justice of the All-just God, to say nothing of the love of 
the All-loving Father ? It is sometimes said that all these 

things will be adjusted in the life to come. This may be 
so, but it does not give any rational explanation as to why 
they are so in the life here, nor does it seem reasonable 
specially to exclude human life on earth from the scope of 
the law and order, of the exquisite design and purpose, 
which obtain everywhere in the natural world. 

Again, a babe dies a few hours after birth, after a 
spirit was specially created for it. That spirit will be the 
poorer for ever for missing that life and its experiences on 
earth. But if earthly experiences have no use later on, 
and if life on earth has no permanent value except that of 
being judged for eternal hell or eternal heaven, a spirit 
coming into a body which lives up to old age may be said 
to be badly treated, as it has to endure trouble, misery and 
sins, and to run the risk of going to hell at last, whereas 
the babe runs no risk, suffers no misery and is as well off 
in the end as the other spirit. 

Moreover, this theory makes God a servant of man 
as He may have to wait for creating a new soul till a man, 


' REINCARNATION 135 


constant; and a little quickening of reincarnation or 
shortening of heaven-period would increase the physical 
population of our globe very greatly without any increase 
in the total number of incarnating spirits. 

Moreover, there is no reliable proof that the popula- 
tion of our earth has increased, for though the census may 
be fairly accurate in some countries, it is mere guess work 


in a thickly populated country like China. 
QO. Now about reincarnation ; what is its necesstty ? 
Ans. Reincarnation is necessary logically, scientifically 
and morally. 
Q. Please explain each in detail, First, what ts the 
argument from logic ? 
Ans. Reincarnation 1s necessary logically, as without 
it, with nothing to satisfy the reason, life is a hopeless 
riddle. 

Is there any purpose in our life between the cradle 
and the grave? Do we, or do we not, prepare ourselves 
in some way for the life beyond death? If there is a life 
of happiness on the other side of death, it is earned in 
some way, either by resisting temptation or by positive 
well-doing. If effort is necessary for earning the heavenly 
life, the case seems hard for a babe who dies in infancy 
and has no chance. Or perhaps it is that such a one, 
having done no wrong, enters heaven. Then it seems 
hard for others who have to live a long life of temptation 
and dangers and run the risk of going to hell at last, while 
again in that case every mother should pray, not that her 
new-born babe might live and thrive, but that it should die 
immediately. Also if the result be the same, so that a 
babe dying in infancy and a good man living up to a ripe 
old age both go to heaven, then life is a snare and worse 
than useless as it is full of needless pain and misery. 


136 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Moreover, if heavenly life is to be earned by individual 
effort, equal chances must be given to all. But we see that 
it is not so when men are born differently with different 
powers, capacities and opportunities and amid different 
circumstances and environments, one a savage, an imbecile 
or a congenital criminal, and another endowed with good 
tendencies and favourable opportunities. Nor can it be 
that little is expected from the one and much from the 
other, for it would be but an admission that this life is 
needless and that it is right that the one should pass here 
a life of ignorance and pain, and the other of refinement 
and pleasure, and yet both reap the same result. Nor will 
it do to say that the one receives a higher seat in the 
heaven-world, because of his greater difficulties here, for 
then the other may demand that he, too, should receive an 
equal chance to reach the highest. 

All these problems seem difficult to solve, but the 
theory of reincarnation makes everything readily intelli- 
gible. 

Take a savage without mind or morals who finds 
his own wife the most convenient thing for dinner, eats his 
parents when they are no longer useful and his own 
children because they are not yet useful ; he murders, he 
robs, he drinks, and is eventually killed by one stronger 
than himself. Is that narrow brutal life all that the 
world has to give him, the world which to some is so fair, 
marvellous and full of beauty ? What is to become of him 
on the other side of death ? He cannot be sent to heaven, 
yet it 1s hardly fair to send him to hell. 

Now look at him in the light of reincarnation. After 
his physical body is struck away and he goes to the inter- 
mediate world, be discovers that those he killed are all 
living, and that not having forgotten the past they have a 


REINCARNATION 137 


very unpleasant welcome for him there. He thus begins to 
learn his first lesson that if he kills a man one day, he will 
meet him the next day. He does not learn that in one life, 
but takes many lives todo so. Again, some good after- 
death experience he will have in the heaven-world. He 
will have had some little affection for his wife and children 
before the greater need of hunger overbore it, and that 
little germ will grow and make him happy and will be 
changed into a moral quality with which he will be reborn 
and will also bring a tendency to hesitate before slaying. 
Thus each life he gathers experiences, transmutes them 
into qualities and faculties, and thereby grows a little 
more civilised till he comes to the point at which our 
children are being born to-day. 

Again, if reincarnation be not a fact, what becomes 
of the qualities which we build even in one life with effort 
and difficulty ? A man becomes wise when he has attained 
old age, but he dies when he is most valuable ; and if, 
being irretrievably saved or damned, he ts taken into worlds 
where that knowledge acquired through many experiences 
is useless for ever, the whole of human life becomes 
irrational. But reincarnation explains that the man is 
reborn with those qualities as a part of his character and 
that therefore nothing is lost. Thus the more one thinks 
on reasonable and logical lines, the more inevitable is 
reincarnation seen to be. 

Q. What is the scientific necessity for reincarnation ? 
Ans. Science now demands reincarnation in order to 
complete its theory of evolution. There are two great 
doctrines of evolution which may be said to divide the 
scientific world. The first is the evolutionary teaching 
of Charles Darwin; the second is the later teaching of 


Weissmann. Both these doctrines, important as they 
18 


138 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


are, need the teaching of reincarnation in order to 
complete them; for under both certain questions arise 
to which reincarnation gives the only answer. 

Taking Darwin’s evolutionary teaching in the 
broadest possible light, two great points come out as 
dealing with the progress of intelligence and of morality. 
First, the idea that qualities are transmitted from parent 
to offspring, and that by the accumulated force of that 
transmission intelligence and morality develop. As step 
after step is taken by humankind, the results of the 
climbing are transmitted to the offspring, who, starting as 
it were from the platform built up by the past, are able 
to climb further in the present, and transmit enriched to 
their posterity the legacy that they receive. Secondly, 
side by side with that stands the doctrine of conflict, of 
what is called ‘Survival of the fittest’; of qualities 
which enable some to survive, and by the survival 
to hand down to their progeny those qualities that gave 
them an advantage in the struggle for existence. 

Now those two chief points—transmission of quality 
from parent to offspring, and survival of the fittest in the 
struggle for existence—are two of the problems that are 
very difficult to deal with from the ordinary Darwinian 
standpoint. Taking at first the second point, how are 
social and moral qualities evolved ? Certainly not by the 
struggle for existence. The qualities that are the most 
purely human, ¢.g. compassion, love, sympathy, the sacrifice 
of the strong for the protection of the weak, the willingness 
to give one’s life for the benefit of others, are the qualities 
that we recognise as human against the qualities that we 
share with the brute. The more of these qualities show 
out in man, the more human is man considered to be. 
But those who sacrifice themselves die out. Among the 


REINCARNATION 139 


social animals and even among the fiercest, the beasts of 

prey, the mother sacrifices herself for her helpless offspring, 

conquering the law of self-preservation. ‘The mother-bird 

or the mother-animal, will sacrifice her own life in order to 

draw away her enemy, man, from the cave or the hiding 
place where her young ones are hidden, mother-love 
triumphing even over the love of life. But she dies in 
the sacrifice. Those who show it most perish—sacrifices 
to maternal affection. And among men, the social and 
moral qualities are evolved, not by the struggle for 
existence where the keenest brain and the most unscru- 
pulous conscience carry the day. The human qualities 
of tenderness and compassion can be evolved only by self- 
sacrifice; but there, as in the animal kingdom, the man 
who sacrifices himself dies ; and if the social virtues or the 
human virtues tend to kill out their possessors, and to 
leave the more selfish and more brutal alive, how can we 
explain in man the growth of the spirit of self-sacrifice, the 
continuing growth of the most divine qualities which in- 
capacitate the man for the struggle of existence ? 

Those who have studied Darwinian writings know 
that this question is not fully faced there, and is rather 
evaded than answered. Reincarnation gives the answer, 
that in the continuing life, whether of the animal or of the 
man the self-sacrifice stirs up on the side of character a new 
power, a new life, a compelling strength, which comes back 
over and over again to the world in ever higher and higher 

manifestations; that though the form of the mother 
perishes, the mother-soul survives, and comes back time 
after time; and that those who are such mother-souls are 
trained onward, first in the brute kingdom and then in the 
human kingdom, so that that which is gained by the soul 
at the sacrifice of the body comes back in the reincarmting 


14o THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


soul to bless and to lift the world. Thus every martyr 
who dies for truth, every hero who sacrifices his life for 
his country, every doctor who loses his life in a combat 
with some terrible disease, every mother who sacrifices 
herself for her child, comes back to earth the richer for the 
sacrifice, with those qualities wrought into the soul’s very 
nature, and reaps the results of the self-sacrifice in greater 
power to help. 

Then, regarding the first point s.e., transmission of 
qualities, Weissmann has established two fundamental 
facts, first the continuity of physica] life—and it will be 
seen that to be complete it needs the continuity of intellec- 
tual and moral life. The reason for the latter along the 
Weissmann line is his second fundamental fact that mental 
and moral and other acquired qualities are not transferred 
to offspring, that they can only be transmitted when they 
have worked themselves slowly and by degrees into the 
very fabric of the physical body of the people concerned. 
Mental and moral qualities not being transmitted, where 
can we have the reason for human progress, unless, side 
by side with the continuity of protoplasm, we have the 
continuity of an evolving, developing soul? That con- 
tinuity of the evolving soul is necessary, also because, 
along with the same theory, backed up as it is by facts of 
observation, we find that the higher the organism, the 
greater the tendency towards sterility or towards a very 
great limiting of the number of offspring produced. 
In fact, it is becoming almost a commonplace in science 
that ‘genius is sterile,’ and by that it is meant that 
the genius does not tend in the first place largely to 
increase the number of the race, and secondly, that 
even where the genius has a child, the child does not 
show the qualities of the genius, but for the most part is 


REINCARNATION 14x 


commonplace, tending even to be below the average of the 
time. 

Genius is to be found along two special lines— 
that of pure intellect or virtue, and that of art which 
demands a co-operation of the physical body. The 
first asks little or nothing from physical heredity, but we 
cannot have the great genius in music unless we have with 
it a specialised physical body with a delicacy of nervous 
organisation, a fineness of touch and a keenness of ear. 
These physical factors are required in order that musical 
genius may show itself forth at its highest. There the 
co-operation of physical heredity is demanded. When 
we read the stories of a musical genius we find that he is 
generally born in a musical family ; that for two or three 
generations before that of the great genius, some amount 
of musical talent has been marked in the family in which 
he appears; and that when the genius appears, the 
musical talent dies out, and the family goes back into the 
Ordinary rut of average people. The family flowers in 
the genius; he does not hand on his genius to his 
posterity. 

Now these problems and puzzles of heredity 
find their rational explanation in the teaching of Re- 
incarnation. A musical genius has need of a special- 
ised body born in a musical family under the law of 
Heredity; but, as already explained, that law holds 
good for the physical body alone, and mental and 
moral character is not transmissible. And the genius does 
not come into the world, suddenly God-created, or asa 
mere sport of nature, or the result of some fortunate 
accident. He comes with the qualities he has gradually 
developed by struggle in his past. At the bottom of the 
human ladder of progress stands the lowest savage ; at the 


142 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


top of that human ladder, the greatest saint and the noblest 
intellect, geniuses built by slow degrees, built up by count- 
less struggles, by failure as well as victory, by evil as well 
as good. The evils of the past are the steps whereon man 
rises into virtue, so that even in the lowest criminal we see 
the promise of divinity. He too shall rise where the saint 
is standing, and in all the children of men God shall at 
last be seen. 

That explains why man should have progressed, even 
though Weissmann be right when he says that acquired 
qualities are not transmitted ; for those mental and moral 
qualities are not the gift of the parent, they are the hard- 
won spoils of victory of the individual soul ; and each soul 
comes back to his birth into the new body with the results 
of his past lives in his hand to work with in the present. 

Thus reincarnation with its lessons in the evolution of 
life fills up the gaps in the scientific theory and makes 
intelligible the progress of character and intelligence, side 
by side with the evolution of form. 

Again, wherever we go through nature, looking at things 
of the same kind, we find them at different stages of 
growth; and we constantly find in the more developed 
creature marks of the past along which he has evolved. 
And similarly, when we look at man, we see all stages of 
intelligence and all stages of moral growth. How are 
they to be explained scientifically ? Certainly not by 
the principle—thrown out everywhere by science—of 
sudden creation, of a sudden appearance without cause, 
without antecedents, without anything to explain it. 
Then why these great differences ? Or why even the small 
differences? If we say “Growth,” we are on sound 
scientific ground, because everywhere in nature we see 
growth, differences of size, differences of development ; 


REINCARNATION 143 


and the marks of growth of intelligence and of morality 
that we see among men are clear signs of a past, of 
differences of soul-age. Moreover, we find in human 
intelligence marks of its past, similar to the marks of the 
past in human bodies; intelligence in a new body swiftly 
runs over its past evolution, as all careful observers of the 
unfolding of intelligence in the child know well. 

Q. Now what do you mean by the moral necessity for 
reincarnation ? 

Ans. The third necessity, the moral one, is the most 
potent argument for reincarnation, as otherwise there can 
be no divine justice, no love in this universe. The 
two other possibilities for human inequalities, 7.e., heredity 
and special creation, have already been shown to be 
unreasonable. One is born a cripple, another an athlete. 
Why ? One is a congenital idiot, another a genius gifted 
with brilliant intellectual powers; one magnanimous, 
another greedy and grasping. Again why? If God made 
the difference, it means injustice, helplessness and conse- 
quent hopelessness. One soul born in the slums from a 
harlot mother and a drunkard father, taught nothing but 
crime and curses, compelled to steal for his supper, know- 
ing nothing of kindness or love, becomes a habitual crimi- 
nal, and striking some one hard in passion, while 
drunk, kills him and is sent to the gallows. Where 
would he go after death? He is too foul for heaven, while 
he cannot be sent to everlasting hell when he had no chance 
at all in life. Another soul is reared in a refined family 
and tenderly guarded by loving parents. He is coaxed 
into virtue and given the best education. Throughout life 
he is laden with prizes for the abilities he did not make 
and dies after a life of usefulness and glory. What has he 
done to deserve all this? If each has been born under 


144 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


special creation with everlasting heaven or hell to follow 
after death, is it Divine Justice? Has not the criminal the 
right to demand of God, “« Why didst Thou make me so ?’ 
But Reincarnation restores justice to God and 
power to man and explains that the criminal is a young 
and unevolved soul, a savage who has started in the stream 
of evolution at a later period than the other who is a soul of 
long experience with many lives behind him, that both are 
the results of their past, and that the differences between 
them are only those of age and growth. 
Amongst many others, Reincarnation solves the 


following problems : 
1. It explains the present inequalities of social 


condition and privilege. 

2. It removes the metaphysical necessity of 
having to place in the very heart of the Supreme the 
principle of injustice. 

3. It introduces into the moral and spiritual 
worlds the same order which observation and science have 
discovered in the physical. 

4. It explains the appearance of men of genius 
in families destitute of unusual abilities in its other 
members. 

3. It explains the frequently occurring cases of 
unfitness of environment which often embitter disposition 


and paralyse endeavour. 
6. It explains the violent antithesis between 


character and condition by showing that it is the result of 


growth, not of divine fiat. 
7. It explains the variations of the moral sense 


in mankind, #.e., problems of conscience. 
8. It explains the occurrence of accident, misfor- 


tune and untimely or sudden death. 


REINCARNATION 145 


9. It explains the possession by individuals of 
psychic powers. 

10. It gives the reason for and rationale of 
Darwinian Evolution. 

11. It affords a rational solution of the problem 
of what will be the future of men who, having been granted 
a physical existence by God, have never learned to value 
it, ¢.g., the miser, whose only enjoyment is to count a 
number of yellow pieces of metal; or the sensualist who 
has no higher conception of life than bestiality. 

12. It explains the tremendous contradiction 
which often exists between our desires and our will, our 
character as known to ourselves and our actions as seen 
by others. 

13. It solves the difficulty of reconciling the 
Love of God with His Power. 

14. It explains the apparently meaningless 
caprice of death. 

Q. What about the new-born babe who dies immediate- 
ly after birth? How can you explain that useless 
birth ? 

Ans. One of the factors under which reincarnation 
takes place is the Law of Karma or the Law of Cause 
and Effect (see Chapter V), and such an ego had become 
indebted to that law by causing the death of some one 
without malice or intention, killing merely through careless- 
ness like throwing away a burning match, after lighting a 
cigar, which fell on a heap of straw, set fire to a house and 
burnt its inmate to death. Such an ego has to pay for 
his carelessness, not criminality, by a brief delay in taking 
anew body. He pays by the early loss of the child-body 
and consequent delay, but immediately takes another, 
Ordinarily within a few months. 

19 


146 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


But it is the parents who suffer most in such cases. 
Why? Possibly those parents in a previous life had been 
guardians to a distant relative’s orphan child simply for 
appearance’ sake and had shown unkindness or active 
cruelty to him, so much so that the child had died. By 
the Law of Karma, they reap as they had sown, and they 
have to pay the debt standing against them, for their 
lack of love, in the loss of the body of their own child, dear 
to their hearts, and thus learn tenderness and kindness for 
all children alike. The child dying immediately after birth 
loses nothing : only his progress is delayed a little ; but the 
parents suffer, as they deserve by their karma in the loss 
of their long-hoped-for child. Their karma is thus 
brought into touch with that of the person who owes the 
debt of life, and both destinies are worked out in the death 
of the child. 

Q. To what extent is the belief in Reincarnation 
found in religions and philosophy, anctent and modern ? 
"What is the approximate number of people who believe 
in the tdea of Reincarnation as part of their religtous 
creed ? 

Ans. The philosophy of Reincarnation antedates the 
remotest antiquity all over the world as it is a necessary 
corollary of the immortality of the soul. Reincarnation is 
taught in the great epics of the Hindus as an undoubted 
fact on which morality is based. The Egyptians undeni- 
ably taught this doctrine, and their conception of it as 
shaped by the priesthood is displayed in their classic, The 
Book of the Dead, one of their chief scriptures, describ- 
ing the course of the soul after death, a copy of which was 
deposited in each mummy case. In the old Persian faith 
it is scarcely discernible in the extant writings of the Avesta 
—the major part having been irretrievably lost—though a 


REINCARNATION 147 


passage is found in the Vandidid—the most orthodox of 
the Zoroastrian books—which refers to the doctrine of 
the transmigration of animal life. The Buddha taught it 
and constantly spoke of His past births. Among the 
scattered remnants of old races on the American continent, 
the belief is occasionally found, as among the Zuni 
Indians. The Hebrews now do not seem to accept rein- 
carnation, though taught in the Kabala, and belief in it in 
the old times peeps out from it here and there. In the 
Wisdom of Solomon it is stated that coming into an 
undefiled body was the reward of “ being good”. At the 
most, a few thousands among those reckoned as Christians 
believe it at the present time, and Christianity now re- 
jects it though the Christ accepted it by telling His disciples 
that John the Baptist was Elijah ; while Origen, the most 
learned of the Christian Fathers, declared that “ every 
man received a body according to his deserts and his 
former actions”. The Sufi Muhammadans hold that 
belief, and it comes to us in the Middle Ages from a 
learned son of Islim, Jalail-ud-Din Rumi, the Persian 
poet and mystic: 
‘*' 1 died from the mineral, and became a plant ; 
I died from the plant and reappeared in an 
animal ; 
I died from the animal and became a man, 
Wherefore then should 1 fear ? When did I grow 
less by dying ? 

Next time I shall die from the man, 

That I may grow the wings of the angel.”’ 

As Max Miller truly remarked, the greatest minds that 
humanity has produced have accepted Reincarnation. 
Pythagoras taught it, and Plato included it in his philo- 
sophical writings. Virgil and Ovid take it for granted. 
The Neo-Platonic schools accepted it, and the Gnostics 


148 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


and Manicheans believed in it. In later time we find it 
taught by Schopenhauer, Fichte, Schelling, Lessing, Heary 
More, Herder, Southey, Bulwer, Pezzani, to name but a 
few among the western philosophers and authors. Hume 
declared that it was the only doctrine of immortality a 
philosopher could look at; Goethe in his old age looked 
joyfully forward to his return. Emerson, the Plato of the 
nineteenth century, as well as Wordsworth, Rossetti, 
Gosse, Tennyson, Browning, Coleridge, Collins, Bailey, 
Sharp and other poets believed init. The reappearance of 
the belief in Reincarnation is not, therefore, an emergence 
of a belief of savages among civilised nations, but a sign 
of recovery from the de-rationalisation of religion, which 
has made life an unintelligible tangle of injustices and 
partialities and has given rise to so much scepticism and 
materialism. 

Generally speaking, the people who at the present 
time believe in Karma and Reincarnation are the Hindus 
and the Buddhists. The Hindus number about 250,000,000 
in the total population of India of nearly 320,000,000. The 
number of Buddhists is not easy to ascertain accurately 
as we know hardly anything about the huge population of 
China. Rhys Davids, relying on census returns, gives the 
number of Southern Buddhists as 30,000,000 and that of 
the Northern Buddhists, (counting the total population of 
China, arrived at mainly by lumping it in,) as 470,000,000 
thus making a total of 500,000,000 Buddhists, though 
Dr. Findlater places the total number of Buddhists in 
China alone at “ more than 340 millions’. Thus even at 
the present moment it would seem that nearly half the 
human race hold a belief in Karma and Reincarnation, 
while in the past the proportion would be very much 
greater as these doctrines were also current in the lands 


REINCARNATION 149 


then dominated by Chaldean, Egyptian and Greek 
thought. 

Q. But is not the doctrine of Reincarnation, though 
found tn the Hindu, Buddhist, Egyptian, Greek and 
Roman religions, alien at least to Christiantty 7? 

Ans. This question of profound importance is being 
much discussed to-day by thinkers in the West, and is 
arousing a good deal of controversy and antagonism which 
seem rather to be based on ignorance than on study. The 
doctrine of the pre-existence of the soul and reincarna- 
tion branches out along two lines in the early Christian 
writings, and in the writings of the Jews who preceded the 
Christians. Sometimes stress is laid upon the fact that 
the soul did not come into existence with the body, that 
he is eternal in his nature, or to speak more correctly, 
the Spirit is eternal and comes forth from God. This 
branch of the doctrine, then, commonly distinguished as 
‘the pre-existence of the soul” simply asserts that the 
Spirit in man is eternal, comes forth from God ; that there 
came forth also from God many Spirits who are not 
incarnate in human form, and that these passed on 
through various stages and through various worlds until 
some of them came into the physical world, where they 
underwent a training which prepared them for a higher 
evolution, gradually climbing back with the experience 
that they had gathered into the original purity that they 
had lost. That doctrine, in the form roughly sketched 
here, may be said to be universal, both among the Jews 
and in the early Church. In the more precise and 
scientific form of reincarnation, #.e., repeated rebirths 
into the physical form of man on a physical earth, it is 
found in some of the writings of the early Church, but 
not in all. Some speak vaguely of pre-existence, others 


150 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


definitely of repeated births into the world. In both, the 
principle is the same, the idea that the human Spirit 
coming forth from God is not inherently holy, save by his 
derivation from the One Supreme Holiness; that the 
holiness in nature which is due to his being derived from 
God may be partially lost for a time. When the Spirit 
has lost his primitive innocence, then he is spoken of as 
the soul—the soul being the intermediate state between 
the Spirit and the body, that which gathers experience, 
that which passes through the various worlds in the 
universe, and returns ultimately with the experience he 
has gathered to his primal home in God. 

Now it is found that the Fathers attacked very bitter- 
ly and denounced very vehemently one form of the doctrine 
which was current among the Greeks and the Romans, in 
the literature of their time; and that is the idea that the 
human soul can pass into an animal form. But the 
very fact that that is the only form of pre-existence and 
reincarnation that they denounced makes all the stronger 
their general acceptance of the principle just described. 

But in order to understand the position in which 
the Church of Christ arose, a comprehension is necessary 
of the Jewish environment and the thoughts and views 
of the Jewish people to whom, of course, the Apostles 
and the early disciples belonged, and among whom, accord- 
ing to genealogy, Jesus Himself took birth. Inthe Old 
Testament, the verse from Jeremiah: “ Before thou 
camest forth from the womb I sanctified thee, and I 
ordained thee a prophet ”’ (i, 5), is one that is referred to 
by several Fathers of the Church in this very relation 
of the pre-existence of the human soul. Both Origen 
and Jerome distinctly refer to the statement, that 
before Jeremiah was born he was sanctified as a prophet, 


REINCARNATION 15r 


as one of the proofs from the Holy Scripture of the pre- 
existence of the soul. For Origen specially points out 
that divine Justice cannot possibly be defended unless 
a man, sanctified as a prophet, or born to some great 
service in the world has earned that pre-eminence by 
former righteous living or has climbed to that blessing by 
meritorious action in the past. Then there is the very 
definite statement in Malachi, (iv, 5,) that Elijah will 
return. Again, there is a very interesting passage in the 
book of the Wisdom of Solomon, in which Solomon says 
“I was a witty child and had a good Spirit. Yea, 
rather being good, I came into a body undefiled ”’ (ix, 15). 
Thus there is the distinct statement that because Solomon 
was already a good Spirit that he came into a body 
undefiled. Then again, certain definite statements as 
regards the Jews of his own time are given by the famous 
Jewish writer, Josephus. With regard to the Pharisees, 
in his De Bello Judaico (ii, 8), he says: ‘“ They say that 
all souls are incorruptible; but that the souls of good 
men are only removed into other bodies—but that the 
souls of bad men are subject to eternal punishment.”’ 
There is one still better notice in Josephus as to the 
general beliefs in his own day with regard to the 
reincarnation of the soul. Having defended the fortress of 
Jotapata and taken refuge in a cave with some forty of the 
soldiers who desired to kill each other in order to prevent 
themselves from falling into the hands of the Romans, 
Josephus himself addressed the following argument to 
them: “Do you not remember that all pure Spirits who 
are in conformity with the divine dispensation, live on 
in the loveliest of heavenly places, and in course of time 
they are again sent down to inhabit sinless bodies ; but 
the souls of those who have committed self-destruction 


132 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


are doomed to a region in the darkness of the under- 
world?” Now it has fairly been argued by Professor 
Victor Rydberg, in relation to these words, that the fact 
that Josephus addressed an argument of this sort to 
rough soldiers and uneducated men—not to philosophers 
who are known by their writings to believe and teach 
reincarnation in those days—shews that the doctrine was 
generally current among the Jews of histime. Again, in 
the writings of Philo this doctrine is found distinctly 
laid down as one of the bases of the great Jewish 
Alexandrian School. Thus, so far as the Jews were 
concerned, that doctrine was regularly received among 
them, and that is important to remember while coming 
to the words of the disciples of Jesus and their question 
as to the sin of the man born blind, for it is seen 
that they were only referring to the current belief of 
their day. 

Glancing at the New Testament, the first interesting 
thing to notice there is the alleged fulfilment of the 
prophecy of Malachi as to the return of Elijah, the 
prophet. It is perfectly true that when S. John the Baptist 
was asked: “Art thou Elias?” he answered: ‘ No.” 
But Jesus Himself stated exactly the opposite, and said: 
“This is Elias.” The denial of S. John the Baptist is 
easily explained by the fact that the memory of a past life 
passes over death and rebirth only in very rare cases as 
explained before, so that the absence of knowledge on the 
part of the Baptist is no evidence against the reality of 
reincarnation, while the twice-repeated statement of the 
Christ Himself that S. John the Baptist was Elijah 
(S. Matt., xi, 14 and xvii, 12-13), speaking as He did with 
knowledge of the past, surely very much outweighs the 
denial of the Baptist on a point that he could not be 


REINCARNATION 153 


expected to remember. It is interesting also to notice the 
repetition of character, which is exactly what might be 
expected—both were preachers of righteousness, both were 
ascetic by training and fiery by nature, brave in the 
rebuke of evil in high places, the strong vigorous 
character of the prophet Elijah reappearing in the 
equally strong and vigorous character of S. John the 
Baptist. Again, they bore an outward resemblance to each 
other with similar peculiarities of dress. Elijah was 
‘a hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his 
loins,” while John the Baptist had ‘his raiment of 
camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins”’. Their 
home was the solitude of the desert. Elijah journeyed 
forty days and forty nights unto Horeb, the mount of God 
in the Wilderness of Sinai (I Kings, xix, 8). John the 
Baptist was in the Wilderness of Judea beyond Jordan 
baptising (Mark, i, 4). And their life in exile—a self- 
renunciating and voluntary withdrawal from the haunts 
of men—was sustained in a parallelly remarkable way by 
food bird-brought or wing-borne. ‘I have commanded 
the ravens to feed thee,” said the voice of Divinity to the 
Prophet (I Kings, xvii, 4), while locusts and wild honey 
were the food of the Baptist (Afait., iii, 4). Thus with the 
identity of character, certain outward resemblances and 
the twice-repeated solemn declaration of Jesus Himself, 
it is difficult to escape the conclusion that S. John the 
Baptist was really a reincarnation of Elias, if the Gospel 
be reliable. 
Then, the case of the man born blind (S. J 042, ix) does 
not need labouring. The question is so plain: ‘‘ Who did 
Sin, this man or his parents?’ The disciples realised that 
this must be the result of some sin or folly ; and their 
question is as to whose sin it was that had brought about 
20 


154 -YHEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


this deplorable result. Was it that the parents had been 
so wicked that they deserved to have the sorrow of a 
blind son; or was it that in some previous state of ex- 
istence the man himself had sinned, and so brought upon 
himself this pitiable fate ? Obviously, if the latter were the 
true solution, the sins which deserved this punishment 
must have been committed before he was born—that is to 
say, in a previous life. Thus both the great pillars of 
Theosophical teaching—Reincarnation and Karma—are 
clearly implied in this one question. Those who imply 
by the answer of Jesus “neither did this man sin nor 
his parents,” a non-belief in reincarnation, will have to 
take up the extraordinary position that the parents of the 
man were sinless, for the two are put on exactly the same 
ground: “ Neither this man nor his parents.” But an 
unbiassed mind, not desiring to twist the text in order to 
support a preconceived idea, will naturally see in that 
answer, spoken by One Himself by birth a Jew, and 
spoken to Jews among whom the doctrine of Reincarnation 
was current, the simple and direct statement that this man’s 
blindness was not due to sin in a former life, any more 
than to the sin of the parents who gave the blind child 
birth. The Master assigns another and mystical reason, 
“that the works of God may be manifest in him,” but 
surely, had He deemed that the conception of rebirth, 
which was clearly in the minds of His disciples, was 
erroneous in itself, He would have stated so, as He did 
elsewhere when they needed correction, and would have 
rebuked them for their folly with the only answer: “ Why 
ask me the foolish question whether the man is born blind 
because of his sin? How could he sin before birth ?”’ 
Again, the phrase in Jokn, xvi, 2, “ In my Father's 

house are many halting places,” is very significant. 


REINCARNATION — 155 


The word mistranslated ‘mansions’ is a word used for 
the rest-houses along the roads of the empire. This 
is a very suggestive reference to the many rests which 
the human soul or ego takes in the Father’s house between 
the lives of effort on earth in which his stature is grow- 
ing. ‘‘ Be ye perfect ’’ would be an idle command of the. 
Christ if spoken to poor stumbling humanity with but a 
few years to live, or to drunken loafers whose thoughts are 
centred on the nearest public house, but a glorious promise 
if spoken to men who had time in which to grow to the 
“ measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ’. Says 
the Christ Himself: ‘“ The disciple is not above his Master, 
but every one when he is perfected, shall be as his Master ” 
(S. Luke, vi, 40). 

There is another text in the Revelation which 
implies reincarnation. It is the verse in which the 
Son of Man, addressing one of the Seven Churches of Asia, 
makes the statement of the one who overcomes: “I 
will make him a pillar in the temple of My God, 
and he shall go forth no more.” That “ going forth” 
which comes to an end with the final overcoming refers to 
the repeated goings forth of the soul from the heavenly 
places, which come to an end when the soul is perfected 
and becomes ‘a pillar in the temple of My God”. 
‘‘ Watchers and Holy Ones, pillars in the temple of God 
who shall go out thence no more” (Rev., 3, 12). 

Pre-existence and rebirth are referred to by many of 
the Christian Fathers, and were cardinal doctrines among 
the Gnostics, who represented for several centuries the 
purer stream of the spiritual and philosophical teaching 
of the Christ. 

In the writings of Origen—the most celebrated 

pupil of S. Clement of Alexandria and perhaps the most 


156 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


brilliant and learned of all the Ecclesiastical Fathers— 
especially in his great treatise De Principtis, there is a 
mine of information as to the teachings of the early 
Christians, in the second century. 

His was the evolutionary view. Referring to 
S. John the Baptist being filled with the Holy Ghost in his 
mother’s womb (I, vii, 4), he says that some “ may think 
that God fills individuals with His Holy Spirit, and 
bestows upon them sanctification, not on grounds of justice 
and according to their deserts, but undeservedly. And 
how shall we escape that declaration, ‘ Is there unright- 
eousness with God ? God forbid.’ Or this, ‘ Is there respect 
of persons with God?’ For such is the defence of those 
who maintain that souls come into existence with bodies.”’ 
S. John the Baptist was only filled with the Holy Ghost 
in his mother’s womb because by previous righteous living 
he had earned that blessing. Origen adds that God 
“disposes everything according to the deserts and moral 
progress of each individual,” and that this is necessary 
‘‘to demonstrate the impartiality and _ righteousness 
of God, that, conformably with the declaration of the 
Apostle Paul, ‘there is no acceptance of persons with 
Him.’”’ 

Origen further declares that the condition of a man 
is the judgment of God on the deeds of each individual 
and proceeds to illustrate his argument by the famous case 
of Jacob and Esau (II, 1x, 7). That case has sometimes 
been used as an argument by the Calvinist School for the 
direct predestination of man by God either to eternal 
happiness or eternal misery. But according to the teaching 
of Origen, man being born free could not be predetermined 
by another will either to happiness or misery, save in the 
course of justice, as the man himself had deserved it. It 


REINCARNATION . 157 


would be unjust if God loved Jacob and hated Esau 
before the children were born, and the only way to recon- 
cile that declaration with the justice of God is to say that 
Esau was reaping the fruits of past evil, while Jacob was 
reaping the fruits of past good. This is the declaration 
made most definitely alike by Origen and also by Jerome. 
For Jerome (Letter to Avitus) says: “ If we examine the 
case of Esau, we may find that he was condemned because 
of his ancient sins in a worse course of life’’; and so 
also Origen declares: “ It is found not to be unrighteous- 
ness that even in the womb Jacob supplanted his brother, 
if we feel that he was worthily beloved by God, according 
to the deserts of his previous life, so as to deserve to be 

preferred before his brother.”’ He adds that this must be 

‘carefully applied to the case of all other creatures, 

because, as we formerly remarked, the righteousness of 

the Creator ought to appear in everything”. ‘ The 
inequality of circumstances preserves the justice of a 
retribution according to merit.”’ 

Origen deals admirably with the case of Pharaoh 
whose heart, it is written, was hardened by God, and 
points out that in this world it is not always the 
rapid cure which is the most effective: ‘* Sometimes it 
does not lead to good results for a man to be cured 
too quickly, especially if the disease, being shut up 
in the inner parts of the body, rage with greater 
fierceness” (III, i, 17). And he declares that the 
hardening of the heart was intended only to enable 
Pharaoh to see the evil of his ways, so that in future 
lives, having learned the lesson that it was a bitter thing 
to sin against God, he also might turn to righteousness of 
living, as a good physician of souls sets the remedy to the 
disease with which the man is afflicted. 


158 TH EOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


From these quotations it can be seen that there is 
no possibility of challenge of the idea that reincarnation 
was taught by Origen. But one more quotation may be 
added, the strongest of all, to demonstrate that Origen 
has in his mind repeated births into this world, and not 
only previous experiences in other worlds. ‘‘ Those who, 
departing this life in virtue of that death which is common 
to all, are arranged in conformity with their actions and 
deserts—according as they shall be deemed worthy—some 
in the place which is called the ‘ infernus,’ others in the 
bosom of Abraham, and in different localities or mansions.”’ 
These are the conditions in the invisible worlds after 
death. “So also from these places, as if dying there, if 
the expression can be used, they come down from the 
‘upper world’ to this ‘hell’. For that ‘hell’ to which 
the souls of the dead are conducted from this world is, I 
believe, on account of this distinction, called the ‘ lower 
hell’. . . Everyone, accordingly, of those who descend 
to the earth is, according to his deserts, or agreeably to 
the position that he occupied there, ordained to be born in 
this world in a different country, or among a different 
nation, or in a different mode of life, or surrounded by 
infirmities of a different kind, or to be descended from 
religious parents, or parents who are not religious; so 
that it may sometimes happen that an Israelite descends 
among the Scythians, and a poor Egyptian is brought 
down to Judea” (IV, i, 23). There can hardly be a more 
definite statement than that as to the rebirth of souls. 

If a soul can be made good, then to make a soul 
evil is impossible to a God of Justice and Love. It cannot 
be done. There is no justification for it, and the moment 
it is recognised that men are born criminal, as they are 
born every year, one is either forced to the blasphemous 


REINCARNATION 159 


position that a perfect and loving God creates a ruined 
soul and then punishes it for being what He has made it, 
or else that He is dealing with growing, developing crea- 
tures whom He is training for ultimate blessedness, and if 
in any life a man is born wicked and evil, it is because he 
has gone amiss and must reap in sorrow the results of evil 
in order that he may learn wisdom and turn to good. It 
is for Christians to realise how it illuminates life and 
makes rational the burning hope of the Apostle that 
“Christ be formed in you,’ a hope not possible for the 
best of men in a single life, and one ludicrously impossible 
and meaningless if set before the dejected mass of the 
slum-population, drink-sodden and sin-stained, yet far 
more sinned against than sinning. 

Thus Reincarnation is a Christian doctrine, and if a 
Christian accepts it by the exercise of his reason and 
thought, and comes to the conclusion that Reincarnation is 
true, he ought not to take it as an alien doctrine, coming 
from the Hindu, Buddhist, Egyptian, Greek, and Roman 
religions, but should take it as part of his Christian 
birthright, as part of the faith once delivered to the saints. 

Q. If Reincarnation is thus a Christian doctrine, 
why has tt disappeared and has no place in modern 
Christiantty ? 

Ans. Not a word of judgment, criticism or warning 
is found in the New Testament against this doctrine, 
which, as we saw before, formed a considerable portion of 
the philosophies and faiths of the Jews and the Gentiles. 
On the contrary, the Scriptures contain numerous pas- 
sages that are illumined, and only rendered understandable, 
by the light shed upon them by the doctrine of Reincar- 
nation. But that doctrine was condemned and ruled out 
of orthodox Christianity by the Second Council of 


160 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Constantinople in the sixth century (A.D. 553). That is the 
reason why the doctrine disappeared out of official 
Christianity represented by the Roman Catholic Church ; 
but it did not disappear from Christendom. It persisted 
and was preserved in the teaching of many a mystical 
—so-called heretical—sect and in the songs of many a 
wandering minstrel. The School of Albigenses, which 
gave so many martyrs through its clinging to the original 
truth of the Gospel, taught Reincarnation, and that doctrine 
appears from time to time in the Church in the most 
remarkable way. In the seventeenth century the Rev. 
Mr. Glanville, Chaplain of Charles II, was a man of 
unchallenged position in the Church; and yet in his book, 
Lux Orientalis, he lays down step by step exactly the 
doctrine of Reincarnation that is found among the early 
Fathers and is familiar in the mouths of Theosophists 
to-day. In the eighteenth century also there was a regular 
outburst of this doctrine when several books were written, 
proving it to be an integral part of Christianity. 

Thus though the teaching of reincarnation only 
disappeared for a time in the flood of ignorance that 
swept over Europe after the decay of the Roman Empire, 
this splendid conception is steadily coming back into 
western thought through books, lectures or articles 
by philosophers, poets and even clergymen in recent times. 

Q. What are the principal factors which determine the 
next birth of a man ? 
Ans. There are three principal factors: 

The first is the Law of Evolution which presses the 
man into a position in which he can most easily develop 
the qualities he needs. Every man has to become perfect 
by unfolding all the divine possibilities latent in him, as 
the object of the entire scheme is this unfoldment. For 


REINCARNATION 16r 


that purpose he is guided precisely to that race and sub- 
race which, with its surroundings and conditions, is best 
fitted to develop within him the special qualities in which 
he may be deficient. 

But the action of this law is limited by the Law of 
Karma or the Law of Cause and Effect. If aman has 
made karma for himself, which brings about limitations, 
he may have to go without the best possible opportunities 
and rest content with the second best ones. Insucha 
case one’s own past actions restrain the free play of the 
Law of Evolution. 

The third factor which still further limits the action 
of the Law of Evolution is the influence of the group of 
egos with whom he has formed strong ties of love or hate 
in former lives. His relation with those egos whom he 
must meet because of past connections is an important 
factor, acting for good or evil, in determining his 
next birth. 

Evolution for man is God’s will, and the Law of 
Evolution will give a man whatsoever is the most suitable, 
but, as said above, the best opportunities are limited by 
the man’s past actions and his links with other souls. A 
man may be able to learn certain lessons in a hundred 
different positions ; but he may be debarred from more 
than half of them by his past karma; and out of the 
balance a choice may be made mainly owing to the 
presence in a family, or in the neighbourhood, of souls with 
whom he had formed ties of love or hate in the past. 

Of course it is philosophically true to say that a 
man always gets the best opportunities, because he obtains 
the conditicns best suited to his imperfect character and 
necessary for the removal of his imperfections. It is just 
the same in schoolsSwhere we cannot give the best 

21 


162 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


text-book to a young student, because he could not under- 
stand or profit by it as it would be too advanced for him. 

Q. Then do we again come into contact in a new life 
with the people we love or hate in thes life ? 

Ans. Certainly. First of all in the long heavenly life 
the whole of the time is spent with people we loved on 
earth; and when we come back, we tend to do So in groups, 
along with the same loved ones. | 

Love is a link formed between egos, and death 
cannot break it; and loving egos in new bodies recognise 
One another as friends wearing different suits of clothes. 
Still it does not follow that the egos will have the same 
earthly relationship as in the past life. The link of pure 
love remains, but the husband and wife of one life may be 
born as two brothers, or sisters, or as brother and sister, or 
may have the relationship of parent, or child, or grand- 
parent, or grandchild, or of any such tie by blood. But 
if for reasons of karma they are born in different families 
in the same neighbourhood or even in fareaway countries, 
they are brought together and drawn to each other as 
lovers or intimate friends, as nothing in heaven or earth 
can slay love, or break its tie. 

Sometimes the links being those of hatred and 
wrong-doing, ancient enemies are drawn into one family, 
there to work out in misery, or sometimes in ghastly fami- 
ly tragedies, the evil results of the common past. From 
some people we shrink back at sight, and that is the warn- 
ing of the ego against an ancient foe. The bond forged by 
hate can melt away only in the fire of love, as “ Hatred 
ceases not by hatred at any time; hatred ceases by love”. 
Thus back we come, old friends together—old enemies 
together, too—though dressed in new garbs, with new 
vehicles in each life. 


REINCARNATION 163 


In the eighteenth and last volume of the works of 
the late Max Miller, a noteworthy passage appears, 
distinctly stating his belief in reincarnation : 

“JT cannot help thinking that the souls towards 
whom we feel drawn in this life are the very souls whom 
we knew and loved in a former life, and that the souls who 
repel us here, we do not know why, are the souls that 
earned our disapproval, the souls from whom we kept 
aloof in a former life.” 

He is only one more witness in an ever-growing band, 
but each man of mark who adds his testimony increases 
the rationality of the doctrine in the eyes of the many who 
are swayed by the authority of well-known names. 

The idea of instinctive dislike at first sight—the 
so-called Dr. Fell Policy—is well expressed in the 
following verse : 


‘1 do not like thee, Dr. Fell; 
The reason why I cannot tell ; 
But this enough I know full well, 
I do not like thee, Dr. Fell.” 

Q. Please describe how the new mental, astral and 
physical vehicles are formed for a new life. 

Ans. When physical death takes place, a man casts off 
his physical, astral and mental bodies one after another, 
as described in Chapter VI. Thus discarded, those bodies 
disintegrate, their particles mingling with the materials of 
their respective planes. But each man as a spiritual 
Triad—the triatomic Atma-Buddhi-Manas, the Jivatma— 
has annexed to himself from the very beginning a lower 
triad of permanent atoms, an atom each of the physical and 
astral planes, and a molecule or unit of the lower mental 
plane, called physical permanent atom, astral permanent 
atom and mental permanent unit, respectively. These 
permanent ato:ns are carried over by a man from life to 


164 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


life, are stored up, after the disintegration of the three 
lower bodies, as a brilliantly scintillating nucleus within 
his causal body, and are thus all that remains to him of 
his bodies in the lower worlds. They are really epitomes 
of the bodies which gather round them each life, and their 
use is to preserve within themselves, as vibratory powers, 
the results of all the experiences through which they have 
passed. Thus the astral and mental bodies hand on to 
the ego, or the real man, the germs of the qualities and 
faculties of that earth-life, which are then stored in 
the causal body as seeds for his future astral and mental 
bodies. 

People sometimes wonder why the evil qualities 
which a man shows in one life should so often persist in 
later lives. The reason is not only that because the 
opposing good quality is undeveloped, there is an oppor- 
tunity for evil influences to act upon the man in that 
particular direction, but also that the man carries with 
him from life to life the permanent atoms of his lower 
vehicles, and these tend to reproduce the qualities shown 
in his previous incarnations. Yet the carrying over of 
the permanent atoms is necessary if the developed man is 
to fulfil the purpose of human evolution and be master 
of all the planes. If it were conceivable that he could 
develop without those permanent atoms, he might possibly 
be a glorious archangel upon the higher planes, but he 
would be absolutely useless in these lower worlds, for he 
would have cut off from himself the power of feeling 
and thinking. The permanent atoms must therefore be 
purified and not dropped. 

After his stay in the higher world is over, a thrill 
of life from the ego arouses the mental unit which acts 
as a magnet, drawing towards itself materials with 


REINCARNATION 165 


vibratory powers resembling, or accordant with, its own, 
to form a new mental body, representing the mental stage 
of the man with all his mental faculties. 

After the mental body is partially formed, the life- 
thrill awakens or vivifies the astral atom to provide an 
astral body representing the desire-nature and repro- 
ducing the qualities evolved in the past. 

Then the life-touch from the ego reaches the 
physical permanent atom, and the key-note of that atom 
is one of the forces which guide the selection of the 
materials of the future physical body, for none can be 
chosen that cannot, at least to some extent, be attuned 
to that atom. But it is only one of the forces; the 
karma of past lives, mental, emotional, and in relation to 
others, demands materials capable of the most varied 
expressions ; out of that karma, certain mighty beneficent 
Intelligences, called Lipika or Lords of Karma, holding 
the threads of destiny for every man, choose such as is 
congruous, 1.¢., such as can be expressed through a body 
of a particular material group; this congruous mass of 
karma determines the material group, overriding the 
permanent atom, and out of that group are chosen such 
materials as can vibrate in harmony with the permanent 
atom, or in discords not disruptive in their violence. 
Thus the Lords of Karma choose the race, the nation, 
the family, etc., and guide the reincarnating ego to 
the environments required in accordance with the 
three factors which determine reincarnation as described 
before. 

The mould of the new physical body, suitable for 
the expression of the man’s qualities and for working out 
the causes set going in the past, is given by those Great 
Ones, and the new etheric double, a copy of the mould, is 


166 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


accordingly built in the mother’s womb, while the dense 
body is built into that etheric double, molecule by mole- 
cule, physical heredity thus having full sway in the 
materials provided. Thoughts and passions of surround- 
ing people, especially of the mother and father, influence 
the building of the bodies. The new astral body coming 
into contact with the etheric double exercises a great 
influence over its formation, and through it the mental 
body works upon the nervous organisation. This building 
of brain and nerves, and their correlation to the astral 
and mental bodies, go on till the seventh year when the 
connection between the real man and his physical vehicle 
is complete. 
‘‘ Tis but as when one layeth 
His worn out robes away, 
And, taking new ones, sayeth : 
‘ These will I wear to-day.’ 
So putteth by the Spirit 
Lightly its garb of flesh, 
And passeth to inherit 
A residence afresh.”’ 
And this long life of his lasts until he attains that 
goal of Divinity which God means him to attain. 

Q. But why are some persons born deformed, dwarf, 
crippled ? 

Ans. The karma of cruelty inflicted on others in past 
lives results in deformed physical bodies. The inquisitors 
of old and the vivisectors of the present day, as well as 
schoolmasters ruling by fear instead of by love, terrorising 
the children and abusing the power put into their hands, 
are born in such bodies. 

Evil thoughts and desires, hatred and passion, 
cause a deformed body in extreme cases, and in all 
cases result in a body deficient in strength or in 


REINCARNATION 167 


beauty and refinement. Nothing is outside the Law of 
Karma. 

Q. Is not this fate horrible in the case of a person who 
has to be cruel for the ultimate good of others ? 

Ans. Cruelty is the worst crime as it sins against the 
Law of Love. Good intentions are pleaded as excuse ; 
inquisitors wanted to save men’s souls, and vivisectors 
pretend to save men’s bodies, but surely there ought to be 
better methods of doing these. Similarly, the school- 
master ought to eradicate faults in children by love and 
good example, as weak children cruelly treated not only 
suffer physically at the time, but become cowardly 
and servile, and often cruel in their turn when they grow 
strong. 

But the effect of really good intentions is not lost. 
As explained in Chapter V, each force works on its own 
plane. The good intention will react on the man’s 
moral nature, and he will be born with a gentle and 
patient character ; though having inflicted pain on others 
on the physical plane, he must endure physical agony 
as a result, and that he does through his deformed 
physical body. 

Cruelty, among its other horrible results, very often 
brings insanity in another life. On certain occasions it is 
found to bring a sort of repayment in kind, #.c., a man 
who has been cruel, is himself put in a position, in 
another life, in which he suffers great cruelty. Often it 
has also resulted in a remarkable and cataclysmic descent 
in the social scale, and a person who had been cruel in a 
reasonably good position finds himself thrown down among 
the dregs of the populace because of that cruelty. 

‘‘The fate of the cruel must fall also upon all who 
gO out intenticnally to kill God’s creatures and call it 


368 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


*sport’.”” The same thing is true with regard to certain 
articles of dress. There are certain kinds of feathers, 
certain kinds of decorations, that can only be procured at 
terrible cost to animal life—not only by the death of the 
creatures concerned, but generally also of the young ones 
depending on the mother for life. People who wear these 
things, though not desperately or intentionally cruel, are 
certainly criminally careless. They are simply doing what 
other people do, and “try to excuse their brutality by 
saying that it isthe custom: but a crime does not cease to 
be acrime because many commit it,” and the fate of the 
cruel will overtake all such sooner or later. 

Q. Is tt always the case that a child born of parents of a 
low type is entirely low, and that a highly developed child 
will be born of parents of a high stage of development ? 

Ans. Ordinarily like attracts like, and an ego is drawn 
to parents of similar development to get a physical body 

suited to his needs as well as to settle his accounts with the 
parents and relatives-to-be, with whom he very likely had 
dealings in past lives. But there are exceptions or abnor- 
mal cases. Sometimes among a degraded type of people 
in a slum we find a saintly child growing up like an un- 
stained flower from the mire of slum-life, while sometimes 
again in a noble family we come across a ‘ black sheep ’. 
These cases can be explained by the Law of Karma, in the 
link made with other egos in the past. The ‘black sheep’ 
by a kindly deed in a past life may have linked himself to 
the nobler ego, and is in his new life collecting the old 
debt from his late beneficiary in the form of advantages of 
good surroundings. 

In some cases a great soul, moved by a spirit of 
self-sacrifice, may be born among people of a low type, 
simply to uplift the degraded and encourage them by his 


‘REINCARNATION 169 


example to rise to a higher level. Instances of this sort 
can be seen in some of the greatest Saints of Southern 
India born among the Pariahs and in the well-known 
negro Booker Washington. 

Q. Is there a continuous series of incarnations in the 
same sex or can one, born as man in one incarnation, be 
born as woman in another 7 

Ans. Men and women are complements rather than 
duplicates. There are important differences between the 
two sexes—social and biological. 

Professor Edward Lee Thorndike, the famous edu- 
cational psychologist of Columbia University, has classified 
the specific differences in the mentality of the sexes, 
Women, he says, excel in spelling, English, foreign 
languages, immediate memory and retentiveness. Men, 
he says, take the forefront in history, ingenuity, physics, 
chemistry and accuracy of movement. 

According to physiology the feminine body has a 
much larger development of the glandular system, while in 
the man there is a much greater development of the 
muscular system. Emotional development going with the 
glandular system, which nourishes, such development is 
consequently found greater in the glandular system of 
woman than in the corresponding system in man. These 
fundamental physiological differences between man and 
woman are necessary in order that the qualities corre- 
sponding to these might be developed in the Race. ‘“ For 
fathers men were created, as for mothers women,”’ said the 
Manu. That is the mark of difference which governs the 
body of each—Motherhood and Fatherhood—causing the 
fundamental difference of type ; the woman is the nourish- 
er, the protector, the helper ; these are the special qualities 
of the Mother—tender, gentle, patient and enduring—so 

22 


170 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


that even if we take the masculine quality, the quality of 
courage, woman’s courage is very different from the cour- 
age of man. The courage of a man is the great impulse 
of his nature to assert himself as against opposition. The 
courage of woman springs from love or devotion, and she 
will be as brave as, braver sometimes than, the bravest man ; 
but it will be in defence of some one, some thing that she 
loves, and not with the mere desire of rivalry against an 
opponent. That runs all through, though at a later stage 
in evolution those qualities of the two sexes will blend. 

It is quite true that sometimes we find some of the 
opposite qualities developed in each sex, #.e., in the noblest 
man much compassion and in the noblest woman great 
strength and courage. But it is a blending of the opposites, 
in order that the perfect human being, in whom all the 
qualities are developed, may gradually appear on our earth. 
Still no premature attempt to force that perfection is 
desirable, as we have not yet reached the perfection of 
separate qualities. That awaits further evolution. Hence 
the great modern mistake of trying to make women into 
men, to carry them along exactly the same lines, to forget 
the difference and the value of the difference. The 
masculine woman who has “ lost sex ’’ is no more attractive 

than the effeminate man. 

Incarnations are taken by the ego to acquire all 
good qualities and to develop all faculties, thus becoming 
perfect in the end; and different egos requiring different 
kinds of experiences have to be born among different races, 
countries, religions and families. 

The ego is sexless, and sex is a characteristic of the 
form, of the vehicle only; but, as stated before, at this 
Stage of human progress we ordinarily find strength, cour- 
age, firmness, etc., evolved along the male line, and 


REINCARNATION I7I 


tenderness, purity, endurance, etc., evolved along the 
female line, and therefore each ego has to dwell in male 
and female bodies to acquire the qualities lacking at any 
stage. Again, the infliction of wrong by one sex on another 
may, aS a karmic result, draw back the wrong-doers into 
the wronged sex to suffer for their sins of past life. 

As a general rule an ordinary ego takes no less than 
three and not more than seven successive incarnations in 
one sex before changing to the other, but in the case of a 
developed ego considerable elasticity is allowed, and he 
is likely to be born into the sex and race best suited to 
give him an opportunity to strengthen the weak points of 
his character. 

Q. If a man is born in a body susted to the actions of 
his past life and has to suffer or enjoy therein, have very 
sinful people to be born in bodies of animals as many 
Hindus are said to belteve ? 

Ans. Indian Sages have taught three distinct phases in 
the process of rebirth: Resurrection, Transmigration or 
Metempsychosis, and Reincarnation. 

As explained before, our body is a kind of colony of 
atoms and molecules, microbes and bacteria, each having 
a life of itsown. Weare all the time emanating millions 
of lives which are drawn into different kingdoms of nature 
according to the tendency we have given them, while at 
death these life-atoms in the body are scattered all over 
the earth and are directed to new organisms of similar 
tendencies. The doctrine of resurrection is thus true only 
for atoms and emanations sent out by man during the 
course of his life and at death. 

The kamic elements of a man persisting as a shade 
or a shel] for some time after his death are finally dis- 
integrated in the astral world. They are then, according 


1723 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


to the law of attraction and repulsion which controls 
universa) selection, drawn into the kdmic elements of 
animals and men of inferior type. “A drunken priest 
becomes a worm, a Stealer of corn a rat ’’ means that the 
elements which had served as the basis for passions in a 
‘man pass after his death into the bodies of animals 
possessing similar passions. 

But a man, it is argued, may be born as an animal 
to suffer for the horrible crimes of his past life. Those who 
argue in this way forget that there is very little suffering 
ina mere animal body. Thus suppose that he is born as 
a tiger. That tiger, according to his nature, would prey 
upon weaker animals and would lead a life of comparative 
ease up to his death, probably even dying painlessly by 
being shot in the end. But if the same soul were compelled 
to be reborn as a man, would he not suffer more for his 
sins of past life if, for example, he had to lose all his 
patrimony and remain unemployed, and then to see his 
child die of slow starvation before his very eyes, his wife 
thereby committing suicide and he himself turning a maniac? 

A divine spark constituting the soul by individual- 
isation must find an adequate expression of its divine 
nature, and having once risen from the animal stage to that 
of man it would be as impossible for a human spirit to 
dwell in an animal body as it would be for a gallon to be 
contained in a pint measure. 

Still when an ego, a human soul, by vicious 
appetites forms a strong link of attachment to a particular 
type of animal, the astral body of such a person, after the 

soul has left the physical body, may assume a form 
resembling that of the animal which represented his 
passions on earth, and the soul may thus be embodied in 
that animal vesture. Either at this stage or when he is 


REINCARNATION 173 


returning to reincarnation and is again in the astral world, 
the soul may, in extreme cases, be linked by magnetic 
affinity to the astral body of an animal of similar vicious 
appetities and be chained as a prisoner to that animal's 
physical body through its astral. He cannot go to heaven 
if so chained in the astral world just after death, nor can he 
be reborn as a man if the chaining takes place while the 
soul is descending towards physical life. That human 
entity has all his faculties and consciousness in the astral 
world, but cannot express himself, because in the first 
place the animal body is not suited for human self-ex- 
pression, and secondly because the animal still controls its 
own body. But such animal obsession, t.e., undergoing penal 
servitude while chained to an animal, and cut off for the 
time from progress and self-expression, is not reincarnation, 
for reincarnation means entering into a physical vehicle 
which belongs to and is controlled by the ego. Thus we 
understand that the soul of a man does not become the 
soul of a brute, but that the former is bound to the soul of 
a brute and carried in the animal organisation with all the 
energies of that rational soul absolutely impeded. 

In minor cases short of absolute imprisonment the 
ego may take human birth, but the physical body will be 
impressed with the animal characteristics like pig-face or 
dog-face. 

Q. Then how do you account for the statement in ‘ The 
Light of Asia’ that Buddha was able to remember Hes 
incarnation tn a tiger's form ? 

Ans. To account for this, we require neither the birth 
of human souls in animal bodies nor the theory of a per- 
sistent individual consciousness in animals. 

First of all that statement is merely a repetition of 
an exoteric legend and may or may not be correct. 


174 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Even taking it as correct, we are to remember that 
Adepts can trace Their past incarnations right back to the 
beginning when They became men, and Buddha is a Being 
whose powers are far higher than those of Adepts; and 
He could look back and read the Akashic records of a 
previous Manvantara when, out of the Monadic essence 
that was then evolving through the tiger's form, the human 
being that was later to develop to a Buddha was individual- 
ised, #.¢., when that Monadic essence which is now 
Himself was part of a block of such essence ensouling the 


bodies of many tigers. 
Q. At what stage does reincarnation finish for an ego 


and how ? 

Ans. The ego has to descend to lower worlds and 
work there garbed in different vehicles till he attains the 
goal appointed for him by the Law of Evolution, by 
acquiring knowledge and purity enough to be able to func- 
tion self-consciously on the five planes of nature up to 
Nirvana, with full mastery of matter therein. 

What draws him back to earth is first his Karma, and 
secondly ‘ Trishna,’ (in Pali, ‘ Tanha,’) thirst, desire for 
sentient existence on the physical plane. Desire is useful 
so long as experience is lacking, and its thirst remaining 
unslaked, the ego returns to earth again and again. But 
desire is personal and therefore selfish, and the condition 
of Arhatship being unceasing activity without any personal 
reward, the ego in the upward climbing must free himself 
from one desire after another, desire for personal enjoy- 
ment, personal pleasure, personal gain or attainments, and, 
last and subtlest of all, desire for personal perfection. 
Action is not to be stopped, but activity being carried on, 
reward for the fruit of action is not to be desired. Thus 
wearing out of all karma and killing out of desire for all 


REINCARNATION 175 


sentient existence are necessary for liberation from the bond 
of birth and death. But desire cannot be killed out till 
knowledge is acquired, and so liberation cannot be had 
without knowledge. In fact, liberation is not a thing 
to be acquired; we are all free, but in order to know, 
to realise that we are free and not bound, self-knowledge 
is necessary, and we find in The Voice of the Silence: 
‘Shalt thou abstain from action? Not so shall gain 
thy soul her freedom. To reach Nirvana one must reach 
Self-Knowledge, and Self-Knowledge is of loving deeds 
the child.”’ . 

Again in the same book we read: “ Inaction ina 
deed of mercy becomes an action in a deadly sin.” The 
failure to realise this distinction between action and the 
desire for the fruits of action has led to the stagnation 
and passivity characteristic of the eastern nations, since 
spiritual selfishness and indifference brought on their 
decay. 

QO. What ts the interval between lives, the time that 
elapses between two incarnations of the same individual ? 

Ans. The period between incarnations, 1.e., between 
death and the next physical birth, is largely spent in the 
lower heaven-world—Devachan—and the length of life 
there depends on the amount and intensity of aspiration 
during the earthly life. That period varies widely in 
length with different persons. 

Three principal facts have to be taken into 
account: 1. The class to which an ego belongs, that class 
depending on the time when that ego attained individualisa- 
tion, that is, passed from the animal to the human stage. 
2. The mode in which he has individualised, either by any 
of the right ways or normal lines, ¢.¢., of intelligence, will 
and emotion, or by wrong ways or irregular methods, #.e., 


176 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


of pride, fear or hatred, and intense desire for power over 
others. 3. The length and nature of his last life. 

The whole can be well understood by taking 
instances of different classes of egos. 

I. Those who are already on the Path aiid are 
about to reach the goal of liberation ordinarily take a 
continuous succession of incarnations ; being disciples of the 
Masters of the Wisdom, they are eager to continue the work 
on the physical plane for their Masters, and so renounce 
the happiness of the heaven-world that is their due, in 
crder to serve mankind with their work. Their Masters 
choose for them when and where they shall be born, and 
usually, after death, they reincarnate within a few months 
or years, not discarding their astral and mental bodies 
before rebirth, as is normally the case, and taking only new 
physical bodies. But if for some reason these developed 
souls do not follow that course, their interval between lives 
is from fifteen hundred to two thousand years or more. 
Their stay on the astral is very short or rapid and 
unconscious, the greater portion of the interval being spent 
on the highest level of the lower mental plane or heaven- 
world, and about one-tenth of that interval being passed 
by the ego on his own plane as conscious life in the causal 
body in the higher mental world. 

z. For those who are approaching the Path, the 
interval is about twelve hundred years if the ego has been 
individualised slowly by intellectual development, and 
about seven hundred years if he has been individualised 
suddenly by a rush of emotion or by a stupendous effort 
of will. They spend on an average about five years on 
the astral plane and the rest in the heaven-world, except- 
mg about fifty years in the causal body on the higher 
mental plane. 


REINCARNATION 177 


Persons distinguished along artistic, scientific or 
religious lines have the same interval, with a tendency to 
a longer astral and a shorter causal life. 

3. A large class of people, gentlemen with a keen 
sense of honour and above the average in goodness, 
intellect and religious feelings, including, for example, the 
best types of professional men, city-merchants and country- 
gentlemen, and others who are well developed and 
altruistic, has an interval from six hundred to one thousand 
years including twenty or twenty-five years spent on the 
astral, the balance being spent in various stages of the 
heaven-world with only a touch of consciousness in the 
ego on his own plane. 

4. Another class, like most city-merchants, gentle- 
men still, a little below the average in goodness, intellect 
and religious feelings, who turn their intellect to more 
material ends and have a life less elevated than the 
professional man, has an interval between lives of five 
hundred years, twenty-five in the astral and the rest in the 
heaven-world. They have no conscious life in the causal 
body, though they have the flash of memory vouchsafed to 
each ego when he touches his own plane between two 
physical incarnations. 

5S. The great mass of the lower middle class, of the 
type of small shopkeepers, shop assistants or farmers, con- 
ventional, dull and narrow, though well-intentioned, has an 
average interval of two hundred to three hundred years 
with forty years on the astral and the rest spent on the 
lower levels of Devachan. 

6. The so-called working classes, the skilled labour- 
ers working both with hands and heads, men of respectability 
and good character, have an interval varying from one 
hundred to two hundred years, of which about forty are 

23 


178 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


spent on the middle level of the astral and the rest on the 
lower subplanes of the heaven-world. 

7. The vast mass of unskilled labour, well meaning 
but careless, and also the high types of savages have an 
interval from sixty to a hundred years, whereof forty to 
fifty are spent on the lower part of the astral and the 
remainder on the lowest subdivision of the heaven-world. 

8. Savages of comparatively mild type, some hill 
tribes of India, and also the wastrels, the unemployable and 
the drunkards among all nations, as well as slum-dwellers, 
are absent from the world from forty to fifty years, spent 
entirely on the lowest subdivision but one of the astral 
plane. 

9. The lowest specimens of humanity, the most 
brutal of savages, the habitual criminals and the wife-and 
child-beaters spend about five years on the lowest subplane 
of the astral before being reborn, unless they are earth- 
bound by crime, which not infrequently happens. 

In all the above cases those individualised by 
intellect tend to take the longer of the two intervals men- 
tioned as possible for them, while those who attained 
individualisation by other modes tend to take the shorter 
interval. 

When a child dies, he, too, has his short astral life 
and his Devachan before return to rebirth; the interval 
between the two lives may vary from a few months to 
several years, according to the age and the mental and 
emotional nature of the child. 

But the length and nature of the last life are also a 
great factor in determining the interval. An ego dying 
young, not having an opportunity to generate great spirit- 
ual force will have a shorter interval than an ego living to 
old age, and will also have a greater proportion of astral 


REINCARNATION 179 


life, because most of the strong emotions are generated in 
the earlier part of the physical existence, while the more 
spiritual energy is ordinarily generated during the later 
part and continues to be so generated up to the end of that 
earth-life. The character of the man during his earth- 
life also greatly influences the interval, as some men 
lead a long life without much of spirituality in it, thus 
naturally tending to shorten the interval between their 
incarnations. 

Again, egos are closely associated in groups or 
families, and this association tends to equalise the intervals 
between lives as they have to be brought into incarnation 
together, thus involving an increase or decrease of the rate 
at which the spiritual force in individual cases discharges 
itself. But there is no injustice anywhere—each one reaps 
exactly as he has sown. 


KARMA r8r 


Q. You speak of the Law of Karma, but are there not 
two other explanations or theortes of human destiny—one, 
the Will of God, and the other, the Result of Chance ? 

Ans. Of course, one theory is that destiny is the Will 
of God, that at His command things are bestowed or are 
withheld, that we are like puppets moved by His hand and 
no exertion can change our destiny. But a consistent 
application of this theory means that God blinds children 
and breaks the hearts of strong men, permits the innocent 
to suffer for the guilty and creates a world with souls 
born as cripples or idiots or congenitally diseased for no 
fault of theirs. And for what purpose? We know not 
why we come into the world and whither we tend, treated 
unjustly so long as we stay here. But this theory of human 
destiny shows God to be unjust and capricious. 

Again, if destiny be the result of chance, life is 
merely a hotchpotch of circumstances. If there be God, 
He does not concern Himself with the world He has 
created. Human bodies might be born through parents 
swayed by passion in a hovel, or in the home of refined 
persons, without a law governing birth, without any choice 
on our part or justification of the conditions or environ- 
ments, everything being the result of chance. Then we 
can never be certain of results; we might toil for years, 
and after all might fail by chance. Science is possible 
because nature is organised by law. Why should there be 
law and order in all things in the universe except in human 
events and human existence ? 

Q. Then what is the third explanation of destiny, this 
Law of Karma ? 

Ans. Karma literally means Action. Every action has 
a past which leads up to it as well as a future proceeding 
from it. An action implies a desire which prompted it, 


182 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


. gnd.a thought which shaped it, as well as the visible move- 
ment called the ‘Act’. A desire stimulates a thought, 
, and the latter embodies itself in an act, while sometimes 
it is a thought, in the form of a memory, that arouses a 
desire, and the desire bursts into an act. Every cause 
was once an effect, and each effect in turn becomes a cause. 
An action is the outer form of an invisible thought and 
desire, and in its very accomplishment gives birth toa 
fresh thought and desire,.the three forming a circle per- 
petually retraced. The relation of these three as ‘ Action’, 
and the endless interlinkings of such actions as causes and 
effects are all included in the word Karma, a recognised 
succession in nature, 3.¢., alaw. Hence Karma is called 
the Law of Causation or the Law of Cause and Effect. 
The Law of Karma is the Law of Cause and Effect, 
of force and the effects produced by it. This force is of 
the physical world of movement, or of the astral world 
of feeling, or of the mental world of thinking. Each 
man is using all three types of force, the first with the 
activities of his physical body, the second with the feelings 
of his astral body, and the third with the concrete and 
abstract thoughts of his mental and causal bodies. To 
aspire, to dream, to plan, to think, to feel, to act—all 
this means to set in motion forces of three worlds, and 
according to the use made by him of these forces, he 
does good or evil karma—he helps or hinders others. 
Since he is one unit in a humanity of millions of indi- 
viduals and not an individual by himself, each thought or 
feeling or act of his affects each of his fellow-men, 
in proportion to the nearness of each to him as the 
distributor of force. Each such use of force by him, 
which helps or hinders the whole, of which he is a part, 
brings with it a result to him, a resultant reaction of his 


KARMA 183 - 


action to others. In the physical world, an injury 
inflicted by him’on others will bring the reaction of pain, 
while the karma or reaction of a kind act is a force 
which adjusts material circumstances so as to produce 
a comfort; in the astral world, dislikes will react as 
griefs, while sympathies will bring happiness; in the 
lower mental world, criticism of others will work itself 
out in worries to him, while search for truth will produce 
inspirations ; and in the higher mental world, aspirations 
will give ideals to be followed life after life. 

But first it should be understood that the Law of 
Karma is a natural law and not an artificial one laid 
down by an external authority. An artificial law has 
penalties attached to it, which are local, changeable and 
escapable. A thief may escape detection altogether 
or may get light or heavy punishment if caught. But 
a natural law is not a command like an artificial law; 
it is a simple statement of successions or sequences. 
That ‘fire burns,’ that ‘if you put your hand into fire, 
it will burn,’ is the statement of a naturallaw. It is not 
a command not to put your hand into fire, nor does 
it lay down a penalty for its breach, but lays down an 
invariable sequence of conditions—such a condition being 
present, such another condition will invariably follow ; 
and the sequences never vary. The first condition 1s 
called the cause, the second the effect. But if a new 
condition is introduced, the succeeding condition will 
be altered, the effect now being the resultant of both. 
It has nothing of the nature of command; it leaves 
us free to choose, but points out that such and such 
thing will inevitably happen as the sequence of our 
choice, and whatever the condition we choose, we must 
accept with it the inevitable sequence. Wanting to 


3184 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


produce water by the union of oxygen and hydrogen, 
we require a certain temperature which we can obtain 
from the electric spark. If we insist on keeping the tem- 
perature at zero, or substitute nitrogen for hydrogen, 
we cannot have water. Nature does not supply or with- 
hold water, but merely lays down conditions for its pro- 
duction. We are free to have it or go without it. If we 
want it, we must bring the things together and thus make 
the conditions. Without those conditions, no water is 
formed ; with those conditions, inevitably water is produced. 
Are we bound or free? Free as to making the conditions, 
bound as to results when we have made them. 

It is an invariable law, and invariability of law 
does not bind—it frees. Science proves that knowledge 
is the condition of freedom and that only as a man knows 
can he compel—nature is conquered by obedience. The 
scientific statement of this law is: “ Action and reaction 
are equal and opposite.” 

Its religious version cannot be better put than in 
the well-known verse of a Christian Scripture: “ Be not 
deceived ; God is not mocked ; whatsoever a man soweth, 
that shall he also reap.” Let us add also: Whatsocver a 
man reaps, that he has sown in the past. 

In the fine matter of the higher worlds the reaction 
is by no means instantaneous, often spreading over long 
periods of time, but it returns inevitably and exactly. 

“ Though the mills of God grind slowly, 
Yet they grind exceeding small ; 


Though with patience stands He waiting, 
With exactness grinds He all. 
* It knows not wrath nor pardon ; utter true 
Its measures mete, its faultless balance weighs ; 
Times are as nought, to-morrow it will judge, 
Or after many days.”’ 


KARMA 185 


Q. When did karma begin ? 

Ans. The question shows a misconception of the very 
nature of karma. A general law of nature cannot be 
said to have either a beginning or an ending. Wherever 
there is any manifestation, any universe, any world, there 
general laws are also present, inherent in the very nature 
of things. Hence karma, being a general law, is eternal ; 
it is a perpetual condition of existence in matter, neither 
beginning nor ending. Where there is matter, eternity 
can only reflect itself as endless succession, and hence 
matter is said to be the “cause of the generation of 
causes and effects’’. 

If the form of the question be modified and it be 
asked: ‘* When did the karma of a particular creature 
begin ?’’, then the answer is: ‘“ At the time the particular 
creature came into existence.’”” When the eternal Spirit 
takes to himself a garment of matter, he steps into condi- 
tions in which karma is perpetually working. His stepping 
into the conditions begins his particular karma. At first 
it is the karma of the mineral, ¢.e., the play upon him of 
surrounding force and matter, and the reaction from him on 
his surroundings. These actions and reactions weave the 
links of his karma, and the chain draws him into one or 
another type of the vegetable kingdom. There his reaction 
is more complex, and the complicated web of karma 
ultimately lifts him into some animal type. In that king- 
dom his increasing sentiency enters into karmic causes, 
and pains inflicted by him react as painson him. The 
feeling of pain is due to the evolution in him of the power 
to feel; the law is the same, it is still action and reaction, 
but whereas in the mineral these were unaccompanied by 
feeling, in the animal feeling results in pleasure and pain. 
With the development of reason another strand is added 

24 


186 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


to the karmic web, and the action in the thought-world 
is added to that in the acting and feeling worlds. Hence 
though a powerful factor is added to the reaction, the law 
is working on the same lines. 

Applying this law in the realms of mind and morals, 
man shapes his future and becomes master of his destiny. 

Q. How does a man become master of his own destiny ? 

Ans. There are three subsidiary laws under the general 
Law of Karma, and a knowledge of the method of their 
application is necessary to shape one’s future. The three 
threads of the cord of fate are: 

rt. Thought builds character. 
2. Desire makes opportunities and attracts objects. 
3. Action makes environments. 

Q. Taking the first thread of the cord of fate, how does 
thought busld character ? 

Ans. Character in man is the totality of his mental and 
moral qualities. Man means ‘ Thinker,’ and the connec- 
tion of thought and character is recognised in the Scriptures 
of all nations. An Indian Scripture declares: ‘“‘ Man is 
created by thought; as a man thinks, so he becomes”; 
while in the Bible we read: “ As a man thinks, so is 
he’; and again: “ He that looketh upon a woman to lust 
after her, hath committed adultery already with her in his 
heart ’’; and “ He that hateth his brother zs a murderer ”’. 
The vattonale of these facts is that when the mind dwells 
on a particular thought, a definite rate of vibration in 
matter is set up, and the oftener this vibration is caused, 
the more does it tend to repeat itself in the matter of 
the mental body automatically till it becomes a habit, as 
explained in Chapter VII. 

To create a habit of thought a man should choose a 
desirable quality—a virtue, an emotion—and then think 


KARMA 187 


persistently on the chosen quality. He should think 
deliberately of it every morning for a few minutes and 
persist in that thought-creation until a strong habit is 
formed and the virtue 1s built into his very nature—which 
is the case especially when he acts out the thought in daily 
life. Everything being under law, be cannot obtain mental 
abilities or moral virtues by sitting still, but can build his 
mental and moral nature by thinking strenuously and 
acting accordingly. His aspirations become his capacities, 
his repeated thoughts his tendencies and habits. In the 
past he made his character with which he was born in this 
life, and he is now making the character with which he 
will die and with which he will be reborn ; and character 
is the most important part of karma. (See “ How to build 
character ” in Chapter VIII.) 

If a man is clever in a certain direction, it is because 
in a previous life he has devoted much effort in that direc- 
tion. Genius and precocity are thus satisfactorily explained. 
High aspirations in one life result in capacities in a 
future life, while the strong will for unselfish service results 
in spirituality. 

Q. Now how does desire make opportunittes and 
attract objects ? 

Ans. Will is the energy of the Self, an interior con- 
centration, prompting to action. When that energy is 
drawn out by pleasure-giving or pain-giving outside 
objects, it is called desire—desire to possess, which is love 
Or attraction; desire to repel, which is hate, or repulsion. 
Between the desire and the desired object there is a 
magnetic tie, and our desire draws to us what we wish to 
possess as the magnet attracts and holds soft iron. There 
may be obstacles or difficulties, but inevitably that desire 
will be accomplished, sometimes even in the same life, 


188 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


sometimes in after-lives. Occasionally a man is found to 
be fortunate or lucky, and everything he touches turns to 
gold. But if that man’s past be known and studied, it 
will be found that he had a great desire for wealth; that 
he followed it steadily; that he strove for it, worked for 
it, sometimes sinned for it, and that desire has to be accom- 
plished, and therefore he becomes a man who seems so 
fortunate that others envy him. Desire brings him oppor- 
tunity. A man strongly desiring to visit a country will 
probably find an opportunity to do so at some time of his 
life. Desire draws one towards the place where the object 
of desire is obtainable and is thus one of the causes that 
determine the place of one’s rebirth. Thus desire draws 
together the desirer and the desired, or makes opportu- 
nities and attracts objects. 

Hence we should be careful of what we desire and 
should test the value of the object of desire ; for inevitably 
it will come to us later, and it may prove a desire that is 
as ashes in the mouth. Many a man has desired wealth 
and gained it, and then found it a burden instead of a joy. 
Many a man has grasped some object of desire, and has 
found it pain-giving instead of pleasure-giving. We 
should therefore measure our desires, try to see in what 
they will result and weigh the value of the desired object. 
Then gradually we will learn naturally to desire the things 
that are righteous and pure, good and uplifting. With 
every one this careful watch over the desire-nature is 
necessary, for only when the desires go in harmony with 
the Divine Will can they prove sources of happiness when 
they are gratified, and not sources of pain. 

Q. How does action give us our physical environments 7 
Ans. The third thread of our cord of destiny appears 
on the physical plane as action, and is the least important 


KARMA 189 


of them all as it only slightly affects the Inner Man directly. 
Actions are effects of our past thinking and desires, and their 
karma is for the most part exhausted in their happening, 
though they affect us indirectly by giving rise to fresh 
thoughts and desires. The spinning of this thread brings 
into our destiny outward happiness or outward misery. 
As a man has made people physically happy or physically 
miserable, so will he reap karmically from his action 
favourable or unfavourable physical circumstances, con- 
ducive to physical happiness or physical suffering. His 
nearest circumstance, the expression of his past activity, 
is his physica] body, and this is shaped for him according 
to the mould of the etheric double, as explained before. 
Wisdom in the present life is the result of experiences in 
past lives, while conscience is similarly built of painful 
experiences in the past. 

Thus the reaction of our thoughts on ourselves is 
the building of character and of faculties ; the reaction of 
desires on ourselves is the gaining of opportunities, of 
objects and of power, making us ‘ lucky ’ or ‘ unlucky’ as 
the case may be; the reaction of our activities on our- 
selves is our environment, the conditions and circum- 
Stances, the friends and enemies that surround us. Two 
parts of our karma we bring with us, our thought-nature 
and desire-nature ; the third part we are born into, our 
environment, including our physical body. 

We are what we are because of our past thoughts, 
desires and actions, there being no favouritism in Nature. 
With this idea properly grasped, envy and resentment 
become impossible, and we cease the useless swearing at 
fate. We reap in this life as we sowed in the past; as we 
are now sowing, so shall we reap in the future; and as we 
are now spinning, so shal] our cord of fate be for future 


190 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


life. Thus man is the creator of his future, moulder and 
master of his own destiny. 


‘* Who toiled a slave may come anew a prince, 
For gentle worthiness and merit won ; 

Who ruled a king may wander earth in rags 
For things done and undone.”’ 


‘That which ye sow ye reap. See yonder fields ! 
The sesamum was sesamum, the corn 

Was corn. The Silence and the Darkness knew, 
So is a man’s fate born.” 


“The pepper plant will not give birth to roses nor 
the sweet jessamine’s silver star to thorn or thistle turn.” 
‘“‘ Thou canst create this day thy chances for thy morrow.” 
“ Act thou for them to-day, and they will act for thee 


to-morrow.”’ 


“ Look ; the clay dries into iron, 

But the potter moulds the clay ; 
Destiny to-day is master, 

Man was master yesterday. ’ 


Q. But does not this conception of destiny controlled 
by the Law of Karma eliminate God from the world ? 

Ans. No. On the contrary our idea of God becomes 
grander than before, because instead of believing Him a 
bad architect who has built the world badly, so as to 
require constant interference to set things straight, we see 
in Him the Perfect Architect of the Universe, guiding that 
universe by exquisitely balanced natural and moral laws, 
perfect in their working even to the minutest detail. 
Transgression of these laws brings misery ; obedience to 
them confers happiness. 

The Laws of Nature are only the most material 
expressions of the Divine Mind, of the Divine Will, and they 
are like rocks. Man goes and bruises himself against 
them. If he will not learn in any other way, if he will not 
learn by precept and example, then he must learn that 


KARMA 191 


way—by the hard facts of the Laws of Nature—though it 
means suffering and evil. That is what Shri Krishna means 
when He says: “ I am the gambling of the cheat.” That 
man, the cheat, has something to learn from his cheating, 
and it is the only way in which that poor soul can learn it. 
He induces evil by his stupidity and wrong-headedness, but 
that is all within the Divine Knowledge, all that is part 
of Him. His mind, although he is misusing it, is yet part 
of the Divine Mind ; and although he is doing wrong, yet, 
out of the wrong which he does, good for him will come, be- 
cause he will learn by that, and by failure he will learn 
to step on to the right path. It is, as it were, a last resort, 
but it is a resort and therefore within the Divine Plan. 
The man had both precept and example, and had he 
chosen, he would have avoided all evil and suffering. He 
would not take it and he must evolve. Therefore, if there 
is no other way in which he will learn, then under the 
Divine Laws he learns by the evil that he does and the 
suffering that follows upon that evil. Thus there is a 
sense in which everything absolutely is God. 

Q. What ts stn ? 

Ans. Sin is popularly supposed to indicate a defiance 
of the Divine Law—the performance of some action which 
the actor knows to be wrong. But in almost every case 
man breaks the law through ignorance, heedlessness or 
lack of experience, and not of deliberate intention. When 
once a man really knows the Divine Intention, he 
inevitably comes into harmony with it, for two reasons : 
at an earlier stage, because he sees the utter futility 
of doing otherwise; and later because, seeing the glory 
and beauty of the design, he cannot but throw himself 
into its execution with all the powers of his heart 
and soul. 7 


192 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


But it may be objected that in daily life we con- 
stantly see people doing what they must know to be 
wrong ; but this is a misstatement—or at least a misunder- 
standing—of the case. They are doing what they have 
been told is wrong, which is quite a different matter. Ifa 
man really knows that an action is wrong, and that it will 
inevitably be followed by evil consequences, he is careful 
to avoid it. A man really knows that fire will burn him ; 
therefore he does not put his hand into it. He has been 
told that the fire of hell will burn him as the result of a 
certain action, but he does not really know this, and 
therefore when he feels the inclination—or is tempted—to 
do the action, he does so in spite of the threatened 
consequences. It will also be found that every one who 
does wrong justifies the wrong action to himself at the 
time of its commission—thus proving want of real know- 
ledge—whatever he may think about it afterwards in cooler 
moments. Even in those who, for once, know an action to 
be sinful, lack of experience is still there, for the sorrow 
that follows on sin has not yet made a sufficiently deep 
impression, and always, until that impression is made, the 
man will ignorantly go aside from righteousness. 

So sin is not a perversity to be met with punishment 
and savage persecution, but is the result of an unfortunate 
condition of ignorance or lack of experience, which can 
only be dealt with by enlightenment and education. Of 
course, by the selfish action called sin a man sets in motion 
certain causes which will bring him unavoidable results by 
the educative, and not punitive, Law of Karma—the Law 
of Cause and Effect. 

Q. Is there any forgiveness of sins ? 
Ans. Forgiveness of sins posits retaliation in some 
form. The conception of punishment for sins belongs to 


KARMA 193 


a degraded idea of God as a limited Deity raised above 
men by superior power, but of like passions with the men 
He rules. : 

Our progress through evolution consists in the 
gaining of wisdom under the Laws of Reincarnation and 
Karma, and a child learning to walk may well be supposed 
to be punished by its falls just as a man is supposed to be 
punished for his sins when he reaps the results of his 
ignorance and mistakes. 

Moreover, we do not expect Laws of Nature to 
forget or forgive an infringement, and karma is a law of 
the Divine Nature, in which there is no variableness, neither 
shadow of turning. If a man flings himself against a wall, 
he will bruise himself ; law is like a wall, and doing wrong 
is flinging oneself against the wall. Repenting does not 
cure past bruises. 

The Divine Law operates as invariably in the mental 
and moral worlds as in the physical. A man falling into 
a fire will burn his body, and neither prayer nor repentance 
can save him from the pain. He will not even dream of 
asking the law of gravity for forgiveness if he infringes it ; 
why then should he expect forgiveness if he has infringed 
mental or moral laws ? The false teaching that a man can 
do wrong and be forgiven, #.¢e., escape the consequences of 
his wrong-doing, is very demoralising. 

Karma is not a punishment for sin, but the unavoid- 
able result of the causes set in motion, and sorrow is ever 
the plant that springs from the seed of sin. After sowing 
evil seeds our salvation lies not in asking for forgiveness, 
but in trying to make amends and doing better thereafter. 

Again, karma is the readjustment of harmony in 
the universe, broken by a selfish action called sin; and the 


method of adjustment being that the Law of Love shall 
25 


194 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


rule all in all, to ask for forgiveness is to ask that harmony 
might not be restored. In a world of law, there can be no 
punishment for sin, ¢.e., no arbitrary penalty, inflicted in 
anger and not sequentially related to the sin. Therefore 
to suppose that a man could burn in hell because he had 
not believed in some particular dogma, or that the wicked- 
ness of a finite lifetime, however persistent, can merit the 
torments of an eternal hell, is to do violence, not only to 
our sense of justice, but even to our ordinary common- 
sense. But the good Law is educative, and it is reasonable 
to suppose that if a man, rolling in wealth and living in 
luxury, is totally unsympathetic or indifferent to the urgent 
needs of those connected with or around him, he will be 
given a chance of learning sympathy and righting the wrong 
done, in a future life, and of thus restoring harmony in the 
universe, by himself being born a pauper next life and 
understanding the hardships of poverty from personal 
experience. The Law of Karma “ knows not wrath nor 
pardon,” otherwise it would no longer be absolutely just 
and absolutely inviolable and could not be trusted. 

Thus there can be no interfering with the due 
operation of the Law, no arbitrary letting off as is 
ordinarily implied in forgiveness. But the word “ forgive- 
ness’ is sometimes used in the Christian Scripture in the 
sense of deliverance from spiritual darkness and consequent 
“ rightness with God ”’. In the selfish action called sin the 
will and desire of the lower nature of the man are set in 
opposition to the Divine Will—the Divine Law—and that 
opposition may be quite suddenly removed by some appeal 
from the outside, through a spiritual teacher or somebody 
dearly loved, or a subtle change in the very heart of the man, 
brought about sometimes by sheer satiety. The spiritual 
darkness being thus suddenly dispelled, the human will, 


KARMA 195 


which has been persistently directed against the will of 
God, may turn round and be transformed almost ina 
moment. Thus in the Gospel when the Lord Christ uses 
the words: “ Thy sins are forgiven thee ; go in peace ”’ or 
“‘Her sins which are many are forgiven, for she loved 
much ’’, the word “ forgiveness’ implies something quite 
different from the mere release from punishment and is 
meant to describe the sense of rightness which comes with 
such an experience, as can be distinctly seen in numerous 
passages in the New Testament where it is said in so many. 
words that one truly “‘ forgiven’ can sin no more. 

But even with this forgiveness, this sense of right- 
ness, with the will of the sinner redeemed, the effects of 
his previous sins are not blotted out ; that which he has 
already sown, he will have to reap, though he will sow 
evil seed no more. He is free and forgiven, because he 
has rightly resolved and is now working with the Divine 
Will and not against it. Similarly, in the Bhagavad- 
Gita, Lord Krishna, speaking of a man who has 
turned from seeking the gratification of the lower 
self and lifted his eyes to the God within and around him, 
Says that such a man, though of evil life, may be at once 
counted amidst the good—“ he hath the right way chosen, 
he shall grow righteous ere long.” But, again, it may 
happen that when the sinner has chosen the right way 
and also when the outer reaction of evil is worn out, 
someone with higher knowledge seeing the chain of cause 
and effect, may declare the suffering ended, as was done by 
the Christ with the glad words of liberation: “ Take up 
thy bed and walk.” 

Q. Does repentance of sins do any good ? 
Ans. A man should not be carried away by delusions 
about remorse and repentance. If he thinks over a 


196 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


fault, he creates a thought-form of that fault; the 
more sorry he feels, the more often he turns the matter 
over in his mind, the stronger the thought-form grows. 
‘‘ What you think upon, that you become,” and therefore 
by brooding over a fault within himself, he simply 
strengthens it. So when he has strayed away from the 
right path, instead of giving himself to repentance and 
remorse, he should say: ‘‘ Well, that is a foolish thing to 
do; I will never do it again.” He should remember 
what Talleyrand said: “ Any man may make a mistake ; 
we all make mistakes; but the man who makes the same 
mistake twice is a fool.’’ 

Thus the idea of remorse, of repenting one’s 
sins, is a delusion. It is a waste of time and energy, and 
none should let himself be carried away by it. He should 
put it behind him and go on from where he may be, 
making up his mind not to make the same mistake again. 
This is very strongly put in The Voice of the Silence: 
** Look not behind or thou are lost.” A Master once said : 
“The only repentance which is worth anything is the 
resolve not to do it again.” 

Of course, this does not imply that he will escape 
the consequences of his evil karma already done. He has 
sown evil seed and must reap its evil harvest. But his 
repentance is a new cause, as it sets him against his sin ; 
it 1s a force to undo the deterioration of character which 
is the worst result of the wrong-doing. And his turning 
away from the sin, towards God, is like turning his face 
away from a wall, towards the sun; the sunlight 
warms and cheers him, and this warming and cheering of 
the heart is what the repentant sinner feels and calls 
“forgiveness”. He can then gladly accept the suffering 
which follows his sin. Thus the only good of real 


KARMA 197 


repentance, 1.¢., the resolve not to do it again, is that in 
future he will be proof against temptations of the same 
kind and hence will not be liable to further consequences 
or evil effects. 

Q. Then can karma be transferred from one person to 
another ? Does not transferability of karma underlie the 
Christian doctrine of vicarious atonement 7 

Ans. As already explained, punishment of sins has no 
place under the Law of Karma. Moreover, vicarious 
atonement is grossly misunderstood. In the early Church 
the teaching on the Atonement was, that Christ, as the 
Representative of humanity, fought and conquered Satan 
who had held humanity in bondage, and set his captive 
free. The Christian teachers lost touch with spiritual 
truths and began to preach that Christ suffered the wrath 
of God for man’s sins. 

The Law of Sacrifice underlies all systems ; it lies 
at the root of evolution, and universes are built on it. In 
the doctrine of the Atonement it takes a concrete form in 
connection with men who have reached a certain stage in 
spiritual development when they realise their oneness with 
all mankind. When it is said that Christ suffers for men, 
His purity replacing their sin, His wisdom their ignorance, 
it means that He so becomes one with them that they 
share with Him and He with them. There is no substitution 
of Him for them, but the taking of their lives into His and 
the pouring of His life into theirs ; for having risen to the 
plane of unity He is able to share all He has gained. His 
at-one-ment with His brethren is not by a vicarious sub- 
stitution, but by identity of nature, by the unity of a com- 
mon life. He is sinful in them, and His purity purges 
them; in them is He the Man of Sorrow. Thus identity 
of nature was mistaken for a personal substitution, and 


198 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


from that doctrine narrowly seen grew the idea of vicarious 
atonement as a legal transaction between man and God 
where the Christ took the place of the sinner. 

A man’s karma is his personal identity, what he 
has made himself, and none can eat his food for him, or 
live his life for him, or bear his karma for him, without 
annihilating him. A man can certainly help another to 
bear his own karma, but cannot take from him his 
appointed means of advance by manly endurance. Thus 
vicarious atonement setting a premium on a man’s laziness 
and committal of sins is unreasonable and unmoral. 

Q. But sf all be the working out of law and a compel- 
ling force, ave we not helpless slaves of destiny ? Is not 
karma a doctrine of fatalism ? 

Ans. Fatalism implies that we are so bound by circum- 
stances that no effort of our own can free us. ‘ Ignorance 
of nature is the source of all suffering, and there is no 
ignorance so fatal, so disastrous, as knowledge of only one 
side.” A little knowledge of this Law is often distinctly 
dangerous and has a certain paralysing effect, because one 
of the results of knowing a little about it is the tendency to 
sit down and say: “Oh, it is my karma.” It is like a 
man knowing something of the law of gravitation sitting 
down helplessly at the foot of the stairs and saying : “ As I 
must move to the centre of the earth, I cannot go up.” 

The Law of Karma like all other Laws of Nature 
binds the ignorant and gives power to the wise; it is not a 
compelling, but an enabling, force, and says that while we 
are bound by what we have done in the past, we can 
each moment mould and modify the future by the choices 
we make, and that, exertion or the effort of the present, is 
greater than destiny or the result of the past, as explained 
also by Bhishma, the Master of Dharma. 


KARMA 199 


Our karma is of a mixed character, not a great 
stream to sweep us on, but one made up of currents run- 
ning in various directions, some neutralising one another, 
with an extremely small net result. Thus all weights in 
the balance of karma not being in one scale, and those 
weights being evenly balanced, a finger’s weight can turn 
the scale ; and though out of the past thoughts, desires and 
actions some are with us and some against us, forming our 
so-called destiny, by our present exertion we can easily 
turn the scale either side we like and conquer our past. 

Again, when an opportunity presents itself, we need 
not hesitate to take advantage of it, fearing our resources 
as inadequate to discharge the responsibility. That oppor- 
tunity would not be there unless our karma had brought 
it to us as a fruit of past desires, and the very effort to 
seize it would awaken latent powers within us. We 
should aim at a little more than we think we can do, and 
the karmic force acquired in the past comes to our aid ; 
and even if we fail, the power put forth passes into the 
reservoir of our forces, and the failure of to-day will be 
the victory of to-morrow. Circumstances may be adverse, 
but we may have reached a point when one more effort, 
a little more exertion, may mean success. 

Q. I understand that the bonds of a man are of his 
own making, but how ts he gusded tnto his environments 
of nation and family ? 

Ans. In one single life an ego cannot reap all the harvest 
of the past, nor discharge the obligations contracted 
towards other egos. 

The etheric mould of the reincarnating ego is 
guided, as explained in Chapter IV, to the country, the 
race, the family and the social surroundings which afford 
the most suitable field for the working out of the karma 


200 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


allotted to that particular life-span, though sometimes, at 
a later stage in evolution, he is guided to a particular place 
for the exercise of the faculties and qualities which are 
already developed in him but which are required for 
helping others. 

He is placed where he can come into relationship 
with egos related to him in the past. A country is chosen 
where the conditions are suitable for his capacities, a race 
selected of which the characteristics resemble some of his 
faculties, and a family found with a physical heredity suit- 
able for his physical constitution to work out his karma 
allotted for that life. Thus “the accident of birth is no 
accident at all, but just an inevitable result of causes, 
attractions, affinities, set up by an ego, during his past 
lives, which impel him, when he is ripe for rebirth, to that 
incarnation which is best fitted to give them physical 
expression ”’. 

Sometimes an ego after having gained certain men- 
tal faculties is given some task of an uncongenial nature. 
If ignorant of karma, he will perform his distasteful duties 
grudgingly and think regretfully of his “ wasted talents, 
while that fool X is ina much higher position ’’; but he 
should “ chafe not at Karma, nor at nature’s changeless 
laws,’ and should realise that X has to learn his lesson 
there, and that he himself having learnt it would gain no- 
thing by repeating it, and should set himself to learn the new 
lesson by addressing himself contentedly to the uncongenial 
task, seeking to understand what it has to teach him. 

Again, an ego wanting to help in a larger work 
finds himself encumbered with family duties. If ignorant 
of karma, he frets against his bonds, or even breaks them, 
not knowing that he is thereby ensuring their return in 
future. The knower of karma will see in these duties the 


KARMA 201 


reactions from his own past activities, and will patiently 
accept and discharge them. He knows that when his 
debts are fully paid, these duties will drop away from him 
leaving him free for higher work, and that meanwhile they 
have some lessons to teach him which it is incumbent upon 
him to learn in order to become a more efficient helper. 

QO. If one particular action be done with different 
motives, does not the motive affect the result ? 

Ans. Every force works on its own plane. From 
physical agony inflicted results physical agony endured,. 
and motive does not mitigate the result just as the paim 
of a burn is not mitigated because the injury was sustained 
in saving a child from fire. Motive is a mental or astral 
force, according as it arises from will or desire, and it 
reacts on mental and moral character or on the desire- 
nature severally. A person may be born deformed, but 
with a gentle and patient character, showing that he had 
worked in his past life with a good motive intellectually 
misdirected, like a vivisector or an inquisitor. But the 
causing of physical happiness is a physical force and must 
work out on the physical plane. 

Three men may contribute to presenting a free 
hospital or school to a town from different motives—the first 
from a purely philanthropic motive, the second from mere 
ostentation or from a selfish desire to get a title, and the 
third from mixed motives. Each man’s physical action 
brings relief to the suffering or knowledge to the ignorant, 
irrespective of the different motives, so all the three contri- 
butors will receive equally comfortable physical environ- 
ments next life, but their motives will severally affect their 
characters in their future incarnations for improvement or 
degradation. Moreover, the use which each man makes of 


his wealth and the happiness which he derives therefrom 
26 


202 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


will depend on his character, the first man using it for 
philanthropic and charitable, and the second for selfish, 
purposes. Though the selfish man will get easy and 
pleasant surroundings on the physical plane as the reaction 
of his contribution to the hospital or school fund, his 
selfishness will also sow according to its kind, and mentally 
and morally he will reap that harvest also, a harvest of 
disappointment and pain. By giving money to deserving 
charity either through a selfish motive or through compul- 
sion or force of circumstances in one life, a man may gain 
riches in another life, but this he may lend at a high interest 
and may be too selfish and niggardly to spend. The miserly 
rich, who simply go on hoarding money without being them- 
selves happy by its use or making others so, are thus 
explained. 

Even where heavenly enjoyments are gained by 
charity, it is the charitable heart rather than the nature of 
the gifts made which wins heavenly enjoyment. Gifts of 
money which cause widespread happiness bring, as their 
karma, worldly prosperity in another life; the loving 
thoughts which prompt the gifts bear fruit in heaven. 
Gifts made grudgingly or with a selfish object in view, 
even when they bring worldly prosperity, do not bring 
happiness. Therefore it is that the Bhagavad-Gita dis- 
tinguishes between the three kinds of charity, Sattvic, 
Rajasic and Tamasic ; of harmony, of passion, of darkness 
—alms given in a fit place and time to a worthy person 
without thought of reward, that given grudgingly with a 
view to receiving in return, and that given, disrespectfully 
and contemptuously, at an unfit place and time and to 
unworthy persons, respectively. 

Hence motive is of more importance than action 
and a mistaken action done with a good motive is better 


KARMA 203 


than a well-chosen action with a bad motive. The motive 
reacts on character and gives rise to a long series of effects, 
for the future actions guided by that character will all be 
influenced by its nature ; whereas an action bringing on its 
doer physical happiness or unhappiness, according to its 
result on others, has in it no generating force, but is 
exhausted in its results. 

QO. But how is it that some persons with good motives 
yearning to help others find thetr way blocked either from 
want of power, defective capacity or lack of opportunity ? 

Ans. Opportunities for service taken in one life result 
in enlarged opportunities of service in another, while 
wasted opportunities result in limitations in the body or 
unfortunate surroundings, and are thus transformed into 
frustrated longings. The etheric brain may be built defec- 
tively, and the ego though full of plans may lack executive 
ability. Such a man can advise others to their advantage, 
but is himself unsuccessful when following his own advice. 

The karma of a good life is not the acquisition of 
wealth, or even of high intellectual endowments, but wider 
opportunities for service, either in the line followed in the 
past or in new lines opening up before the ego, to make him 
a better instrument, in the hands of the higher powers, for 
the helping of the world. Any person who is using all the 
powers he has for the service of others and without thought 
of self is very likely to receive new powers. It is the old 
parable of the talents over again. Those who made good 
use of their talents were given charge of far greater work. 
It was said to each of them: “ Thou hast been faithful over 
a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things ; 
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” The joy of the Lord 
—the joy of the Logos—is in His work. For “ God has a 
plan, and that plan is evolution’; He has chosen to throw 


204 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Himself absolutely into His mighty work of evolution ; 
that is the joy of the Lord, the joy of carrying out this 
splendid plan of pouring out His love through the universe. 
He who wishes to enter into the joy of the Lord, 1.¢., take 
part in the work of evolution and in the bliss which it 
brings, should therefore use every talent he already has 
and see that he is using it to the utmost. 

Q. Why does a man have a‘ bad heredity’ or congent- 
tal diseases ? 

Ans. A ‘bad heredity’ is the reaction from wrong 
activities in the past. The drunkard of a previous life 
will be born into a family with nervous diseases like 
epilepsy, while a profligate will get birth in a family 
tainted with diseases of sexual vice. Congenital diseases 
result from a defective etheric double given to the ego by 
the Lords of Karma for his excesses and errors of the past. 
When desires in one life are bestial, cruel, unclean, they 
are the causes in another life of congenital diseases, of 
weak and diseased brains, giving rise to epilepsy, catalepsy 
and other nervous disorders. 

Q. Now what solution does Theosophy give of the old 
problem of necessity and free-will ? Is a man completely 
under the sway of destiny or necessity with no room for 
free-will, or does he enjoy unfrustrated free-will ? 

Ans. Only the One is absolutely free, but man is rela- 
tively free within self-imposed limitations, and while 
powerless to stop the march of evolution, the Will of the 
Divine, he can work for or against the evolutionary law, 
hastening or retarding his own progress within certain 
limits according to his will. He has by the exercise of his 
free-will created necessities for himself, made habits by 
repetition of actions guided by his own will, which habits 
then become limitations. 


KARMA 205 


It is advisable to grasp a few simple principles and 

apply them to solve details, instead of taking up separate 
det§sis without any idea of underlying principles. First : 
the Spirit in man, the Jivatma, the Self, is a fragment 
of the Divine, a “ portion of Myself, a living being ”’. 
Secondly: this Spirit on the Atmic plane is free and 
omniscient, but he wills to live also on other planes, to 
see, hear, taste, etc., on denser planes of being ; the exercise 
of powers gives pleasure and he wills to experience 
this. Thirdly: when he thus plunges into denser matter, 
his powers cannot assert themselves, and he is as a seed, 
a germ of Divine Life, enveloped in avidya or ignorance; 
he becomes bound from outside. Fourthly: slowly he 
learns to shape the matter, so that he can express himself 
through it, and his efforts at first are mere blind pushings 
and gropings in different directions, some bringing him 
pleasure and others pain. Fifthly: he destres pleasure; 
he thinks how to obtain it; he acts according to his 
thought. Thus he makes fetters for his future; for he 
must go to the place where his desires can be gratified ; 
he must work in the mental body which his thoughts have 
formed; he must be surrounded by the circumstances his 
acts have created; thus he becomes bound from within 
by the three threads of the cord of fate, explained before. 
Sixthly : but, amid all these outward and inward bindings, 
he himself remains the free Divinity; he can exer- 
cise his free-will, even though the carrying out of that will 
is hampered by the outer bonds which he has voluntarily 
assumed for the sake of experiencing the phenomena of 
the denser planes, and by the inner bonds which he has 
forged in his struggles with the denser matter. 

All our circumstances are the result of our karma, 

which creates necessities for us, but in spite of being limited 


206 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


by these self-imposed bonds we can mould the future and, 
though we cannot transcend the limits suddenly, we can 
extend them gradually, till we acquire for ourselves practi- 
cally unbounded freedom in the direction of good. Our 
brain and nervous system, constituted now according to our 
own thoughts of the past, are the marked necessities of life 
for us and limit us, but they can be gradually improved. 
Ignorance is the cause of bondage, while knowledge brings 
liberation and freedom of will, for through wisdom a man 
knows himself as one with the Divine Life and acts as a 
free and responsible agent in harmony with the Divine 
Will. 

But “we have a very distinct consciousness of 
free-will in the choice between good and evil at every 
step through life, and we need not confuse our sense of 


that freedom by going into the highest metaphysics of the 
problem ”’. 


Q. Is astrology true? If so, how can tt be reconciled 
with free-will ? 

Ans. Modern astrology, being very fragmentary, is 
often very uncertain in its results; but there is a true 
science of Astrology, and here and there a real astrologer 
may be found. Even modern astrology, however, is often 
fairly accurate in the delineation of character. For the 
most part, modern astrological prognostications of events 
are unreliable, and the predictions are not always true, 
because all the conditions are not known. Every star 
has its own magnetic sphere, and these spheres intermingle 
in a very intricate way ; according to the constitution of 
the human being, some magnetic conditions are favourable 
to him, and others unfavourable. 

There is no antagonism between astrology and 
free-will. A horoscope, if correctly drawn, shows the 


KARMA 207 


results of a man’s past karma in his character, tendencies, 
circumstances, etc. An astrologer may correctly predict 
certain events or circumstances, but knowing only one 
of a pair of forces, he cannot forecast the resultant 
and cannot predict how the man will react on those 
circumstances by his free-will. The reaction, in the case 
of a feeble soul, will be slight and cause but small changes, 
whereas, in the case of a strong soul who can bring all the 
force of his free-will to bear on circumstances, it is bound 
to be great and may upset all calculations. Hence the 
astrological proverb: ‘The wise man rules his stars, 
while the fool is ruled by them.” 

Q. Now instead of being liberated from the bonds of 
karma allotted for one life, how does aman forge new 
links in the chain of karma ? 

Ans. The Lords of Karma in carrying out Their work 
use other persons as Their instruments of reward or 
punishment. Thus though we are being used as mere 
tools in Their hands for the settling of different people’s 
accounts, we have a false idea that we are free agents. 
So when a man injures us, we do not understand that he 
was merely instrumental in giving us our due, but become 
angry with him and try to retaliate, thereby creating fresh 
karma, and forget the remarks in the Gospel on that 
subject: “It must needs be that offences come, but woe 
to that man by whom the offence cometh.” None in this 
world suffers for the sin or fault of another, though 
through our short-sightedness we believe ourselves wronged 
by others for no fault of ours. 

The wise, knowing this, and understanding that they 
should “chafe not at Karma nor at nature’s changeless 
laws,” get angry with none, and suffering the wrong or 
dishonour without grumbling, liberate themselves from the 


208 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


karma allotted for one life (called Prarabdha), while the 
ignorant through anger and grumbling create new karma 
(called Kriyamana), which being added to the accumulated. 
karma of past lives (called Sanchita), comes back again in 
a new life as Prarabdha. Thus through ignorance a man 
creates new karma before the old karma is exhausted, and 
so can have no chance of liberation from the bonds of birth 
and death. 

Q. But if some one injures us, how can we know 
whether tt was the result of our Prarabdha? Bound by 
Prarabdha, what action do we do under tts pressure and 
what by our own free-will ? 

Ans. In a universe of perfect justice none suffers with- 
out cause or for the fault of another, as stated before, and 
the fact that we could be injured proves that we deserved 
the injury by our Prarabdha, even though the man who 
inflicted the injury, acting as a tool of the Lords of 
Karma, thinks that he acted on his own initiative. 

Karma is divided into three parts or is of three 
kinds: 

1. Sanchita (=accumulated) karma, that is, karma 
which has accumulated during many lives. In the earlier 
lives as a savage it is natural that there should be on the 
whole more of evil karma than good. So only a portion 
of his whole karma is given to him to be worked out in 
the next life and the balance kept as Sanchita, as other- 
wise the undeveloped ego would be crushed under the 
entire result of his actions. Again, some of a man’s 
actions need more time for their working out and have to 
pass into Sanchita. 

2. Pradrabdha (==commenced, to be worked out 
in this life,) or ripe karma, karma selected from the 
Sanchita by the Lords of Karma for a man to discharge in 


KARMA 209 


his present life. This is what we ordinarily call fate, 
luck or destiny. Out of the total karma of the past only 
a portion can be exhausted within the limits of a single life. 
There are some kinds of karma which are too incongruous 
to be worked out in asingle physical body of one particular 
type; there are liabilities contracted towards other souls 
who are not all likely to be in incarnation at the same 
time; there is karma requiring to be worked out in some 
particular nation or particular social position, while the 
same man may have other karma needing an entirely 
different environment. Part, therefore, of his total karma 
of the past is selected by the Lords of Karma to be worked 
out within the span of a single life, and this is called his 
Prarabdha. It is such karma that can be sketched out in 
a horoscope cast by a competent astrologer. 

3. Kriyamana, the karma which is in the course 
of making while Prarabdha is being worked out, and which 
being added to Sanchita karma will, when ripe, be meted 
out as Prarabdha in a future life. 

It is wrong to believe that whatever we have to do 
unwillingly is the result of Prarabdha and that which we do 
willingly or carelessly is the result of our free-will. The 
law of gravitation applies equally to a mountain as well as 
to an atom; similarly Prairabdha applies to all our actions, 
big or small. 

Q. But that means that we are slaves of our Prarabdha 
and have no place for free-will. 

Ans. The pressure of Prarabdha lies in some measure 
On our actions, but not on our free-will. Though limited 
by Prarabdha we enjoy Purushartha or free-will, and our 
Kriyamana depends on that. When doing any action our 
attitude of mind is a matter of free-will, and that makes 


our Kriyamana. Take the instance, given before, of the 
27 


210 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


three men who give a million pounds each for a charitable 
institution, one doing it from a philanthropic motive, 
another in the hope of reward, and the third from 
mixed motives. The Kriyamdna of all the three would 
be different according to the motives, as explained before; 
and that karma being added to Sanchita would be meted 
out, when ripe, to each as his Prarabdha in a future life, 
and would be the chief factor in causing a difference in 
their future destinies. Kriyamadna thus depending on our 
free-will even when we are under the influence of Prarabdha, 
the Prarabdha of our future lives is in our own hands. 

Q. But tf one is responsible simply for hts Kriyamana, 
and not for the actual action done, and tf there is pressure 
of Prarabdha in all actions, why should a murderer be 
hanged for murder or a thief punished for theft ? 

Ans. If we admit that a man is responsible for his 
Kriyamana we must punish murderers and thieves, because 
their present Prarabdha is the result of their past Kriya- 
mana for which they are responsible. Again, every actual 
action is a blend of Prarabdha and Kriyamana—never one 
or the other alone. 

Though all actions, big or small, are, in some 
measure, under the influence of Prirabdha, they can be 
stopped or altered in their effect. Prarabdha is in fact 
divided into three classes : 1st—Dradha, fixed, unavoidable, 
or inevitable. 2nd—Adradha, not fixed, avoidable. 3rd— 
Dradha-adradha, fixed-not-fixed. Of these the Dradha 
Prarabdha karma cannot be avoided, but the other two 
kinds can be avoided or altered in their effects by the force 
of free-will. 

Q. Supposing that Dradha Prérabdha is unavoidable, 
how can we escape the effects of the other two kinds of 
Préavabdha ? 


KARMA 2i1 


Ans. The Dradha Prarabdha karma cannot be altered 
at all; Dradhaddradha can be altered in its effect by great 
effort, while Adradha Prarabdha can be easily altered or 
shaken off. As ona rope in a tug-of-war, each action has 
two forces playing on it at the same time—Prarabdha and 
free-will. Where the force of Prarabdha is greater than 
that of free-will, the resultant lies with Prarabdha, and 
free-will cannot alter it ; when both forces are equal, it is 
Dradhadradha, and where the force of free-will is greater 
than that of Prarabdha, it is Adradha. Thus though in 
the bondage of Prarabdha, a man can liberate himself in 
proportion to his free-will, 

A man pits his force against that of a ball thrown 
towards him. If it is a cannon-ball that is discharged, he 
cannot catch it or prevent its action. That is Dradha 
Prarabdha. A cricket ball can be caught with great effort 
or at least have the direction of its motion altered ; that is 
Dradhaddradha Prarabdha. A light rubber ball caught 
with very little effort typifies Adradha Prarabdha. Very 
few actions in our life are unavoidably fixed. We come 
across few cannon-balls of destiny in life, but many cricket 
and rubber balls, and should therefore exert the full force 
of our free-will against any evil karma. 

Q. You advise exertion in all cases, but tf a man be 
bound by Dradha Pravabdha, how is effort or exertion of 
Purushartha (free-will) going to help him ? 

Ans. There are cases where the force of the karma of 
the past is so strong that no effort of the present can suffice 
to overbear it entirely. Yet should we make all effort to 
escape every kind of evil Prdrabdha, first because one 
Cannot know whether a karma was Dradha or Adradha 
Prarabdha, and, at the worst, the effort diminishes 
the karmic force for the future; and secondly 


212 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


because one creates good Kriyamdna by the effort one 
makes. 

It may seem that the limits of a man’s power to 
choose between different courses in life are very narrow, 
apart altogether from the metaphysical argument ; that 
there he is, with his character got at somehow, established 
as a very commanding impulse in his nature, and that the 
circumstances in which he is placed, are there also, with 
no choice of his; how can he help following the bent of 
his nature? But that is his karma. Of course it is a very 
difficult thing to escape from its influence—in one sense 
impossible. But karma is a growing force, and our free- 
will does enable us to modify its growth; and our bent in 
the next life will be either still more defined in its present 
direction, or inclined in a different direction according to 
whether in this life we yield to it without resistance or 
press against its influence. 

A man with a tendency to steal should fight against 
it to the last iota of resistant power, and though he may 
fail and commit the crime, its force will grow weaker in 
the future. Carelessness creates new bad Kriyamana to 
come back as bad Prarabdha in future lives. 

The bulk of the karma of an ordinary man may be 
classed as Dradha. He has not much will and therefore 
accepts the ruling of external circumstances which are due 
to his past actions. All the events of his life could be 
foretold in considerable detail from his horoscope, which 
is not the case with a man of strong will who has great 
power over his circumstances owing to the force of his 
free-will. 

Q. But if a man can thus alter Pravabdha by the 
force of his free-will, will that not be interfering with the 
justice of karma ? Suppose A has injured B in a past life 


KARMA 213 


and that B ts now in a position to injure A according to 
his karma. But if B by his own free-will declines to injure 
A, how is the latter to get his due? If every one did 
like that, will that not prevent the working out of karmic 
laws ? 

Ans. None need flatter himself with the idea that his 
will is strong enough to interfere even a tittle with the 
karma of others. Again, though anyone may be used as a 
tool in giving happiness or misery to others as destined 
for them, if a person forbears doing an evil deed by the 
exercise of his free-will, those destined to suffer do not 
escape their punishment, but the Lords of Karma arrange 
some other way to mete out the punishment through other 
agents and by other means. 

Q. If every person has thus to suffer inevitably accord- 
ing to his karma, why should we interfere with karmec 
justice by trying to help the blind, the crippled or other 
deserving people in difficulty, who may simply be undergo- 
ing the just punishment of their past karma ? 

Ans. It should again be remembered that there is no 
reward or punishment in karma. Karma is educative, 
not punitive, and is merely a sequence of conditions as 
explained before. 

“Ho! ye who suffer! know 

Ye suffer from yourselves. None else compels.” 

It is true that all kinds of evils and sufferings 

around us are the results of karma, but that is no reason 

why we should not labour to change them. None suffers 

ought which he does not deserve, but our duty is simply to 

help and leave the carrying out of the Law in Divine 
. Hands. 


‘Let thy soul lend its ear to every cry of pain 
like as the lotus bares its heart to drink the morning sun. 


a14 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


“Let not the fierce sun dry one tear of pain before 
thyself hast wiped it from the sufferer’s eye. 

« But let each burning human tear drop on thy 
heart and there remain; nor ever brush it off until the 
pain that caused it is removed.” 


Moreover, we do not know at what time a man has 
fully paid his debt of pain and suffering, and if he is to 
receive his due relief karmically, why should we not be- 
come the agents of such good deeds? Even selfishly we 
should try to help when another suffers under his karma, 
for, if we do not do our best, we are making a karma which 
will entail absence of help in the hour of our own need. 
The act of relieving suffering contracts the domain of 
suffering both here and hereafter, both as regards the 
recipient of relief and the agent in conferring that relief ; 
while cruelty and callousness to suffering augments it in 
both directions. 

Again, it is absurd to believe that high Beings like 
the Lords of Karma and Their agents will be confounded 
in their work by the interference of such petty creatures 
as ourselves. If a man does not deserve help, or if the 
proper time has not come for his relief, he will not be 
benefited by our help, ¢.g., he may drop the money given 
him through a hole in his pocket, but we shall be creating 
good karma and acquiring merit by our unselfish act. 
Moreover, we should not have come in contact with the 
man unless relief was due to him at the time. So we should 
try to help all sufferers to the best of our ability and give 
up the foolish idea that we can interfere with another’s 
karma. In fact, it is the highest ideal of its kind to con- 
sider our contact with every one whom we meet, even 
casually, as an opportunity given us for the helping of that 
person by all possible means. : 


KARMA 215 


Q. If the Law of Karma its irresistible, are prayers 
for averting sorrow, or winning happiness, useless ? 

Ans. ‘This question is often asked, but it springs from a 
confused idea of karma. Karma is a result of the past 
which is continually being strengthened or weakened, a 
cord of destiny made up of innumerable threads of desires, 
thoughts and actions, some working in one direction and 
some in another. The answer in any given case depends 
on the constituents of the karma which is acting. If it is 
very strong in one direction, 1.e., is Dradha karma, enough 
desire, thought and action cannot be put against it in 
the present to neutralise the past, or turn the result 
in the opposite direction. But if it be weak in one 
direction, 1.e., be Adradha or Dradhaddradha karma, 
very strong desire, thought and action, brought to bear 
in that direction, may be able to overbear it. Prayer 
may thus turn the balance where the scale of karma 
is not heavily weighted, for prayer, being a strong 
desire, is of the nature of one of the constituents of 
karma. 

Q. How is a selfish man punished in his next life by 
karma ? 

Ans. There is no punishment or reward in karma as 
Stated before, but there is the effect following inevitably 
from causes set going. Selfishness is a mental attitude, 
and its immediate results must be on the mental plane. 
There is an intensification of the lower personality, so that 
the man grows steadily more selfish life after life and is 
deprived of the opportunity to progress. Again, there 
would be karma generated on the physical plane by the 
unkind acts of selfishness, and as one result he may be 
reborn among selfish people and learn through suffering the 
heineusness of this vice. 


216 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Q. You say a selfish man grows steadily more and 
more selfish in each succeeding Isfe; but if a victous man 
comes back in the next life more victous than before, and 
so on and on, how can a bad man ever become good ? 

Ans. There are certain counteracting forces which 
have to be considered. , 

1. Unhappiness follows on vice, to some extent in 
this world, to a great extent in the next. The drunkard 
develops a bloated, coarsened body with nerves shaken and 
health ruined and regrets his folly, while the suffering 
grows keener after death in the astral world. At the end 
of his heavenly life the good side of him is strengthened 
and his faculties are improved, but on his return to earth 
he also brings with him, as the result of his sad experience, 
a shrinking from the evil in which he delighted in his past 
physical life. 

2. Humanity as a whole is being slowly carried 
forward by the great current of evolution, and an evil-doer 
is compulsorily carried with it even though he may foolishly 
retard his progress greatly. But this wilful setting of the 
individual will against the universal Will causes a friction, 
that becomes intolerably painful and compels the man to 
cease from his evil course. 

3. The evil-doer may read a book, hear a dis- 
course or meet a person, that may arouse in him a 
recognition of the folly of his course, and he may open his 
eyes to the suffering he is creating for himself and may 
thereby make an effort to change. 

4. The disapproval of those he loves and honours 
and the desire to gain their affection, may act upon him as 
an incentive to better life. 

3. The mere fact of his own growth, the unfolding, 
however slow, ef the divine Spirit within him, inevitably 


KARMA 217 


quickens the inborn tendency to good and causes a struggle 
against evil. 

Q. But if karma is the Law of Justice, why does a good 
man fail in business while a bad man succeeds ? 

Ans. There is no causal connection between goodness 
and money-making. One might as well say: ‘‘ I am a good 
man, why can’t I fly in the air ?’’ Goodness is not a cause: 
of flying nor does it bring in money. Virtue is its own 
reward, and if we are truthful, our reward consists in the 
happiness arising from our nature growing more truthful. 
If a man acts in harmony with the divine Law, happiness is. 
the result of such harmony. This question is usually asked 
owing to the error of identifying worldly success with 
happiness and of disregarding the element of time. 

If a business man who is determined to be truthful 
does not become discouraged when he sees unscrupulous 
persons going ahead of him, but stands firm and works in 
harmony with the divine Law, regardless of immediate 
worldly results, he wins inner peace and happiness though 
great financial success may not accrue to him. Even that 
may fall to his lot in the long run when his reputation has 
been established, so that he will ultimately come to enjoy 
both the good-will and the custom of the public. 

Material prosperity, again, is very often the worst 
enemy of virtue, and though welcomed as good karma, is 
often the reverse in its results. It is a matter of common 
experience that many a man who does fairly well in adver- 
Sity becomes intoxicated with worldly success and 
prosperity, and falls away from the path of virtue. 

We should not therefore think of the rewards of 
good karma as consisting solely in material objects. The 
Opportunities of spiritual development, which a poor and 
even a sorrow-stricken man may enjoy in any given life, 

28 


418 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


may benefit him in the long run so greatly as to have out. 
weighed the evil of poverty and transitory sorrows. A 
good karma may sometimes have produced a life, the mere 
outward troubles of which we should be apt, if we are 
hasty, to set down to bad karma. Similarly, a bad karma 
may temporarily disguise its effect in material prosperity 
that may bring great suffering in its train in the long run, 
by furnishing the possessor with so many more opportunities 

of accentuating an evil bent. This is the significance of 

the Indian story of a poor man who having won a case 
against his rich adversary, when asked by the king to 
suggest the punishment, begged that more wealth might be 
bestowed on his rich but evil-minded enemy. 

Q. Are all our sufferings the result of our past karma ? 

Ans. A large proportion of a man’s suffering is what 
is called ‘ready money karma,’ not due to the result of 
actions of past lives, as nine-tenths of our suffering is 
merely the outcome of mistaken-action through ignorance 
in the present life. 

Q. Is the wrong we suffer the working of our own 
Prarabdha karma of a past life, or is it possible that 
sometimes this ts not so? Why do we see good and holy 
persons very often suffering in this world ? 

Ans. The ‘fate’ selected for the individual is not 
absolutely rigid and immutable, as a man can and does 
change his fate sometimes, by an unusual reaction to 
circumstances. For example, suicide is not in a man’s 
fate though his visible and invisible circumstances with 
their griefs and worries may, seemingly to us, be too 
much for his strength. Again, a man’s karma may be, 
as it were, put out of gear by the actions of others which 
are not provided for in his life-karma. Similarly, he 
may take an opportunity not specially arranged for him ; 


KARMA 219 


for instance, by taking advantage of the presence of some 
religious teacher whose appearance is not specially related, 
to him, he may make for himself a new opportunity. 
Still nothing can happen to a man which is not due to his 
own karma. There is a large reserve of karma not 
actually in operation, z.¢., Sanchita karma, as stated before, 
and the new karma is deducted from or added to this 
reserve, so that finally there is no favouritism or injustice. 

Every one has a vast store of Sanchita karma 
which must be worked out before he can be finally liberat- 
ed. But as soon as he understands the purpose of life, 
and taking his own evolution earnestly in hand endeav-., 
ours to eradicate the evil and rapidly to develop the good 
within himself in order to become ever a more and more 
perfect channel of the Divine Love, the Lords of Karma, in 
recognition of his earnest desire, increase the amount of 
evil karma to be worked out in the present life and help 
him to discharge his old debt quickly. \ Thus many holy 
and earnest souls seem to suffer because they are making 
very rapid progress and are quickly paying off the debt 
(since they have made themselves strong enough to do so) 
in order that it may be cleared out of the way of their 
future work. 

Q. Then what about the so-called accidents, say a 
vatlway accident or @ shipwreck, or seismic catastrophes 
like an earthquake, where many suffer together ? 

Ans. People with appropriate individual karma are 
gathered together to suffer collectively in such cases. 
Again, souls are gathered into groups of families, castes, 
nations, races, etc., considered as larger individuals and 
have their own collective karma ; and it is here that room 
is found for the so-called accidents as well as for the 
adjustments continually being made by the Lords of 


220 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Karma. Nothing can happen to a man that is not in his 
karma as an individual, but a man can still enjoy or suffer 
through family or national ties in a way not inherent in 
his life-karma, and so receive or pay karmic debts, before 
they are due, as we may Say. The rise and fall of nations, 
seismic changes like earthquakes, volcanoes and floods, or 
national catastrophes like plague and famine, are all 
cases of collective karma. 

Each person has made a large and varied collection 
of evil karma in the course of ages, and so advantage is 
sometimes taken of a catastrophe or a collective accident, 
like a shipwreck, to enable a man to work off a portion 
of the evil karma—Sanchita karma—not normally due in 
the life in which it occurs, to pay a karmic debt, as it 
were, before it is due. Such an opportunity, offered by 
an accident, would be generally taken by the choice of the 
ego, especially if he happened to be an advanced ego, 
over whom some unpaid debt of sudden death had been 
hanging for several lives as a kind of shackle or fetter, 
preventing his going on and hindering his progress. 
Still, unless he owed such a death to the Law, or, with 
such a debt, was advanced enough to take advantage of 
that opportunity, he could not die, but would furnish one 
more instance of the miraculous escapes of which we so 
frequently hear. 

Q. As every man’s actions invariably affect many 
others around him, will he have to meet all those to settle 
his karmic account ? 

Ans. The effects in many cases are trivial, though in 
some they may be of a serious character. Trivial effects, 
good or bad, are merely small debits or credits in our 
account with Nature, though greater effects of either kind, 
especially when there is a distinct personal relationship of 


KARMA 221 


love or hatred, makes a personal account which has to be 
settled with the persons concerned. A man giving a meal. 
to a hungry beggar or causing a petty annoyance to 
another need not meet that other man, as he will receive 
the result of his good or bad action from the general 
fund of Nature, but if he changes the current of another’s 
life by a great benefit or a serious harm, he must, sooner 
or later, meet that other man to adjust the debt. In 
short, small debts go into the general fund, while big ones 
must be paid personally. 

QO. Are the exact time and manner of a man’s death 
decided at or before his birth ? 

Ans. No. Even astrologers cannot actually foretell 
the death of a man, but can merely say that at a certain 
time malefic influences are strong and the man may die, 
but that if he does not, his life will continue until other 
evil aspects threaten him. These uncertainties are points 
left open for a later decision, depending on the use the 
man makes of his opportunities and the modifications 
he introduces by his actions during that life. 

There are certain causes which work towards a 
man’s leaving his physical body, and during the course of his 
life-period his past karma may bring him several times to 
what may be called a rather critical stage ; but other causes 
may be brought to bear upon him, and upon the resultant 
of these forces will depend whether he passes out of the 
physical body at that time or not. Thus though the time 
of a man’s dying out of the physical body is not fixed, 
the life-period which he has to spend under physical 
conditions is fixed, and if he passes out of earthly life before 
that period is completed on the physical plane, he has to 
live on for the remainder of it under what may be called 
partly-earth-life conditions in the astral world. His 


222 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


physical body has been struck away before its life-period 
is over. But the normal condition after death only sets 
in when that earthly life- period is fully exhausted. A number 
of verses in the Indian Shastras imply that death only 
comes at a fixed time, and, normally, death does so come. 
But when it is said: “ Before the period comes, a lance will 
not kill; when it comes a blade of grass is enough to kill,’ 
the true conception is that, when the time comes, the 
smallest cause will bring about the striking away of the 
physical body, but that if the time has not come, even a 
violent cause—a lance—cannot alter the Jife-pertod, still 
it may strike away the physical body. 

People whose minds are not clear over the question 
say: “If a person’s life-period is fixed, if the death-hour 
is fixed, it is no good nursing him or calling in a doctor ; 
he will live or die according to his karma.’ That isa 
serious mistake, for, as explained before, at a critical period 
like this, exertion or present activities may considerably 
modify or even entirely change the result and ensure him 
the use of his physical vehicle up to the end of his life- 
period. 

Thus the fact is that the period of life under 
physical conditions is fixed; the period of striking off the 
physical body is not fixed. At one point or another death 
may come. There will be times when, because of the 
Dhradha karma, death cannot be averted, but there 
may be other periods (of Adhradha or Dhradhadhradha 
karma) when an added force may turn it away 
like any other kind of karma. There are points that 
are certain, and there are those that may be varied by 
exertion. 

Q. Is there karma among animals ? If not, how do 
you account for the difference in their condstions, one 


KARMA 223 


being kindly treated and well-fed, and another subjected 
to brutality and left to starve and fight for a bare living ? 

Ans. One should know first that an animal often does 
make a good deal of karma through the group-soul, though 
not individually ; and secondly, that well-treated animals 
have not so much advantage as they seem to have. The 
sporting dog is taught to be more savage and brutal, killing 
for the lust of destruction, whereby his group-soul makes bad 
karma, for which that group-soul will have to suffer later on 
through other dogs which are but expressions of it ; while a 
lap-dog loses all canine virtues and earns the karma of 
selfishness for his group-soul. A group-soul with its many 
animal manifestations may be compared to a whole body 
with several limbs and organs, and if an organ or limb is 
afflicted with pain through disease, we do not speak of 
such a limb as an individual worthy of compassion, as 
something apart from the whole body. 

If an animal be ill-treated by a man, it must be a 
spontaneous act of injustice on that man’s part, as it cannot 
be the result of a previous karma on the part of that 
particular animal which, not having been individualised, is 
incapable of carrying over karma. Still the thing could 
not happen unless the group-soul of which that ill-used 
animal forms a part had acquired bad karma in the past, 
which is now paid by the group-soul through the manifesta- 
tion of that particular animal, that bad karma being created 
by intentional fights between bulls, stags, dogs, cats, etc., 
where pain is wilfully inflicted, though the prey killed by a 
wild beast for food does not suffer appreciably. 

Any way ‘the human beast’ treating an animal 
Cruelly and causing it to fight and inflict pain on others, 
instead of helping that animal placed in his hands to 
receive stimulus for evolution by human contact, is storing 


224 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


up exceedingly heavy karma for himself, and in many and 
many a life to come will suffer the just result of his 
abominable brutality. 

Q. You have explained the working of karma, but how 
can a man mould his karma deliberately and so modtfy 
his destiny ? , 

Ans. He should first examine the three threads of the 
cord of fate explained before, inspect carefully his stock-in- 
trade, inborn faculties and qualities, good and bad, powers 
and weaknesses, present opportunities and actual environ- 
ments; then selecting the qualities which are desira- 
ble to strengthen he can set to work and modify his 
character very rapidly, taking the qualities one by 
one as stated before, and using thought-power to 
acquire them, never thinking of the weakness but 
its corresponding power; and thus thinking on that 
which he desires to be, inevitably though gradually he be- 
comes that under the Law. If he made mistakes in the past, 
he can modify the results considerably by setting inoperation 
neutralising forces. Thus if he sends a strong thought of 
love immediately after he has made the mistake of thinking 
a thought of hate, he can overcome what otherwise would 
have been the inevitable effect of hate. Vibrations of 
hatred generated in past lives can also be similarly 
neutralised by setting up against them vibrations of love ; 
and moreover, if another sends him a thought of hate, he 
can neutralise its effect, and even kill out that hate, by 
sending back a thought of love as “‘ hatred ceaseth by love”. 

Looking to the second thread of the cord of fate, 
the desire-nature cannot be changed by desire, but can be 
modified by thought. He should mentally create thought- 
forms of the opportunity he wants and fix his will on those 
forms, drawing them within reach, thus literally making 


KARMA 225 


and grasping the opportunities not presented by past karma. 
Again, suppose he is fond of dainty food and has the weak- 
ness of gluttony; he should then think of the disastrous 
results of the vice, z.e., getting bloated and helpless with a 
disordered digestion, and by reining in the desire he should 
breed a disgust for that vice. 

His environments are the hardest of all to change as 
they are in the densest form of matter, but he should set 
himself to change such undesirable part of them as can be 
changed by strenuous effort, while such as he cannot change 
he should accept and learn what it has to teach, when it 
will drop away like a worn-out garment. For example, 
in an undesirable family he should adapt himself to 
his circumstances and fulfil every obligation cheerfully 
and patiently to all egos drawn to him by his past, 
learning patience through their annoyances, fortitude 
through their irritations, forgiveness through their 
wrongs. 

Thus working with free-will and necessity—with 
free-will but under conditions he has created by his past 
thought-nature, desire-nature and physical nature—he can 
mould his karma and make his future destiny. 

One should study karma and apply the knowledge 
to the guidance of his life. Many people say: “ Oh! how 
I wish I were good,” but they do not take the trouble 
to create the causes which result in goodness. It is 
as though a chemist should say: “ Oh! how I wish I 
had water,” without making the conditions which would 
produce it. 

Q. But since a man must return to earth over and 
over again tll he has exhausted all his individual karma, 
and since a good karma drags a man back to birth as 


relentlessly as a bad one, how ts he to cease generating 
29 


226 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


new karma and exhaust all past karma in order to attain 
Usberation 7? 

Ans. A good karma done with the thought of reward 
will bind the man to earth by chains of gold as effectively 
as an evil karma binds him by chains of iron, and though 
he may get as his karmic due worldly wealth and position, 
giving him many comforts and happinesses, yet without any 
inspirations or ideals from his past his life may be merely 
‘one of agreeable futility. The ignorant, in the enjoyment 
-of senses, do not consider a good destiny as a bond, but 
the wise knowing it to be such try to be rid of good and 
evil destiny alike. 

An action is prompted by desire, desire for the fruit 
of action moving a man to activity, and the enjoyment of 
the fruit rewards his exertion. Desire for fruit or 
attachment to the fruit of action is then the binding 
element in karma. To every action is bound its fruit, and 
desire is the cord that links them together, while with the 
burning of desire the connection is broken. So whena 
man longs for liberation, he has to practise renunciation of 
the fruit of action, gradually eradicating in himself the 
wish to possess any object for his own separate self. He 
should “desire to sow no seed for his own harvesting ; 
desire only to sow that seed the fruit of which shall feed 
the world.” He should not neglect any duty, but dis- 
charge every duty perfectly while remaining indifferent to 
the fruit it brings forth. All his actions then partake of 
the nature of sacrifice, the fruit being given freely for the 
helping of men. Thus neither disliking nor desiring any 
object, he ceases to generate new karma. ‘’Tis from the 
bud of renunciation of the self, that springeth the sweet 
fruit of final liberation.’’ “‘ Man winneth not freedom from 
action by abstaining from activity.” “The harmonised 


KARMA 227 


man, having abandoned the fruit of action, attaineth to 
the eternal Peace; the non-harmonised, impelled by 
desire, attached to fruit, are bound.” 

He has then to get rid of old chains and also 
to cease from the forging of new ones; and for this know- 
ledge is necessary. Looking back into his past lives he 
has to neutralise forces coming out of the past by sending 
against them forces equal and opposite, and burn up his 
karma by knowledge. He has also to meet the souls whom 
he has wronged and to pay his debts, thus working out 
karmic obligations which would otherwise hamper and 
retard his progress. 

Q. A man ts drawn back to earth by desires, but the 
Masters having no desire, what is st which binds Them to 
earth? Why do They leave the indescribable bliss of 
Nirvana for the lower levels of the world of men ? 

Ans. There is nothing that the world can offer Them 
which can draw Them back to earth; but They stay in 
the world to help mankind. Even though feeling pity for 
men They do not come in the way of the karmic law, as 
Their interference may really cause confusion; still in 
accordance with the Law They do sometimes help men 
in suffering. Their work is not to put out fire, but 
to prevent its catching; not to remove suffering, but to 
dispel ignorance, the root-cause of all suffering which 
binds man to earth through evil deeds. Thus They stay 
in this world to help Their younger brethren, and labour 
century after century for nothing this world can give Them 
Save the joy of seeing other souls growing into Their 
likeness. 


CHAPTER VI 
LIFE AFTER DEATH 


Question. What is the advantage of the knowledge, 
during life, of the conditions on the other side of death ? 
Why should a man trouble his mind about these matters, 
when he is sure to find out the facts for himself after he 
dies ? 

Answer. This contention is defective in several ways. 
It takes no account of the terror which, from ignorance, 
overshadows the lives of so many, nor of the sorrows of 
separation and the anxiety felt by the survivors about the 
fate of the departed dear ones. The dread is inspired not 
so much by the definite expectation of anything appalling, 
as by the feeling of dim uncertainty, the horror of a vacant 
abyss. The above contention also ignores the fact that man 
after death does not immediately realise his mistakes, and 
that owing to his inability to correct them by the light of 
truth he has frequently to suffer much. The ordinary 
man without knowledge is bound on the astral plane by the 
desire-elemental, to be explained presently, and does not 
understand the possibilities of the life after death, thus 
missing many opportunities of service and progress. 

Although the laws of nature are ever carrying us 
on with them whether we know it or not, yet if we know, 
we can co-operate with them to our great advantage. 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 229 


This we cannot do if we are in the darkness of ignorance. 
To know is like walking in the light, and to understand 
the laws of nature is to gain the power of quickening our 
evolution by taking advantage of those laws that hasten 
our growth and avoiding the working of those that would 
retard or delay it. 

Moreover, from a knowledge of the after-death 
existence a man realises the true proportion between the 
physica] fragment of life and the rest of it, and so does 
not waste his time in working merely for the physical 
period which is but one-tenth or one-twentieth part of the 
whole life between two incarnations. Also when he 
reaches what is called the astral world, after death, he 
does not become alarmed, as he understands his surround- 
ings and knows the best method of work there, and so has 
courage and confidence. Even a man who has heard 
Theosophical truths but once in a lecture, realising in the 
world after death the general accuracy of the remarks, 
tries to recall detailed suggestions as to conduct therein, 
and having at least one point of contact with the known 
can avoid much of the discomfort, bewilderment and fear, 
felt there by others through complete ignorance. But the 
greatest advantage of such knowledge is that he feels con- 
fident enough to lend a helping hand to others and thus 
generate good karma for himself. 

Q. Then what becomes of a man on the other side of 
death ? 

Ans. In order to know that, one should understand 
properly what death is. There is a vast amount of utterly 
unnecessary sorrow, terror and misery which mankind in 
the aggregace has suffered and still suffers through igno- 
rance and superstition about death which is looked upon 
as a formidable and terrible leap into an unknown abyss. 


230 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Death is at first the laying aside of the physica! 
body, the outer garment of the ego or the real man, who 
then continues to live in his astral body until the force 
generated during earth-life by emotions and passions has 
become exhausted. Then a second death takes place; 
and the astral body falling away from him, the man finds 
himself in his mental body in what is called the heaven- 
world. Here he has to stay till the force of unselfish 
thoughts generated during his physical and astral lives has 
worn itself out, and dropping that third body also, the man 
remains for a time as an ego in his own world in the causal 
body before returning to incarnation. 

Thus death is nothing more than birth in another 
region, a repeated process of unrobing, the immortal man 
shaking off from himself one after another the outer 
casings and passing into a higher state of consciousness. 

Q. How does the real man separate himself from his 
physical vehicle ? 

Ans. During the slow process of dying the etheric 
double, carrying Prana and the higher principles with it, is 
withdrawing from the dense body to which it is connected 
by a magnetic thread. At the solemn moment of death, 
even when it is sudden, the past life passes swiftly in 
review before the ego, a fact testified to by those rescued 
from drowning. The ego then lives over his whole life in 
those few seconds before actual death, when the personal- 
ity, becoming one with the all-knowing ego and reviewing 
the entire life marshalled before him in its minutest details 
with the whole chain of causes and effects, sees himself 
unadorned by self-deception and understands the purpose 
of life. During the slow process of dying, extreme quiet 
and self-control should therefore be observed in the cham- 
ber of death so as not to disturb the ego absorbed in the 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 23% 


contemplation of the panorama of his past life, and no 
weeping or lamentation with the idea of a selfish personal 
loss should be permitted. 

Slowly the man thus withdraws himself from the 
physical body enwrapped in the violet-grey etheric double 
until the magnetic tie breaks. He then sinks into a 
peaceful unconsciousness with the double floating above 
the dense body. 

The acts of dying and going to sleep are similar 
except in a few particulars, as already explained in 
Chapter III. In both cases a man withdraws from the 
physical body. When he goes to sleep, he withdraws into 
his astral body and leaves the etheric body with his physi- 
cal sheath, the currents of vitality playing through both 
and keeping them alive; but at death he draws out also 
the etheric double with him, and that double not being a 
vehicle, the man surrounded by it is usually unconscious, 
at least for a moment, and can function neither in the 
physical world nor in the astral. 

After some time, varying from a few moments to a 
few hours, days or even weeks, (but ordinarily in about 
36 hours,) the five higher principles disengage them- 
selves from the etheric double, shaking it off as they 
formerly shook off the dense body and leaving it asa 
senseless corpse. The Prana, thereby losing its vehicle, 
returns to the great reservoir of universal life, as water 
enclosed in an earthen pot and plunged into the ocean 
mingles with the ocean water if the pot be broken. 
The man is now left in his astral body, ready for the 
astral life. 

Q. You speak of “ sinking into a peaceful unconscious- 
ness,” but do we not actually find a man suffering 
terribly during his death-struggle ? 


232 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


‘Ans. Death-struggles and death-rattles are usually only 
final spasmodic movements of the physical body after the 
conscious ego has left it. In almost every case actual 
passing away is perfectly painless, even when there is long 
and terrible suffering in the illness. That is proved by the 
peaceful look which so often comes over the face after 
death, as well as by the direct testimony of most of those 
to whom the question has been put immediately after 
death. 

Q. What becomes of the separated etheric double after 
death ? 

Ans. The physical body, left to the rioting of the 
countless lives previously held in constraint by Prana act- 
ing through the etheric double, begins to decay, and its 
particles pass into other combinations as its cells and 
molecules disintegrate, and the etheric double remaining 
near its dense counterpart, shares the same fate, in a few 
weeks or months, for precisely the same reason—that the 
co-ordinating force of Prana is then withdrawn from it. 
It must not, however, be supposed that these two dis- 
integrations depend upon each other. Clairvoyants see 
these etherial wraiths, which float in churchyards over 
graves where the coarser physical bodies are buried, 
sometimes showing a likeness to the dense body and some- 
times as violet mists or lights. It is advisable for several 
reasons to burn the dense body rather than bury it. 

Q. Why is cremation preferable to burial ? 

Ans. There are several reasons for it. 

1. Nothing that is ordinarily done to the physical 
corpse need make any difference to the real man living on 
the astral plane, though it sometimes does do so owing to 
his ignorance and foolishness. The length of a man’s stay 
in the astral world after death depends on two factors— 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 233 


the nature of his past physical life, and his attitude of © 
mind after his death. During his earth-life he affects the 
building of his astral body directly by his passions and 
emotions, and indirectly by the action upon it of his 
thoughts from above, and of all the details of his physical 
life—his continence or his debauchery, his food and his 
drink—from below. If by persistence in evil passions and 
desires during earth-life he builds for himself a coarse 
astral vehicle, he will find himself after death bound to the 
astral plane during the long and slow process of that body’s 
disintegration. On the other hand, if by decent living he 
gives himself a vehicle mainly composed of finer material, 
he will have very much less discomfort after death and 
will pass through the astral plane very rapidly. 

This much is generally understood, but the 
second great factor—his attitude of mind after death— 
seems often to be forgotten. The desirable thing is for 
him to realise that he is at this stage withdrawing steadily 
towards the plane of the true ego, and that it is his business 
to disengage his thoughts as far as possible from things 
physical, and fix his attention more and more upon those 
spiritual matters which will occupy him later on upon 
Devachanic levels. By doing this he will greatly facilitate 
the natural astral disintegration and avoid the common 
mistake of unnecessarily delaying himself upon the lower 
levels of that plane. 

Many people, however, simply will not turn 
their thoughts upwards. Earthly matters are the only 
ones in which they have ever had any living interest, and 
so they cling to them with desperate tenacity even after 
death. Of course the mighty force of evolution is 
eventually too strong for them, and they are swept on in 


its beneficent current ; yet they fight every step of the way, 
80 


234 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


not only causing themselves unnecessary trouble and sorrow, 
but also seriously delaying their upward progress. Now in 
this ignorant opposition to the cosmic will a man is 
much assisted by the possession of his physical corpse 
as a kind of fulcrum on the physical plane. He is 
naturally in very close rapport with it, and if he be 
so foolish as to wish to do so, he can use it as an anchor 
to hold him down firmly to the lower levels until its 
decomposition is far advanced. Thus while neither the 
burial nor the embalming of a corpse can in any way force 
the ego to whom it once belonged to prolong his stay upon 
the astral plane against his will, either of these causes 
is a distinct temptation to him to delay, and facilitates his 
doing so if he foolishly wish it. So cremation saves the 
man from himself in this matter, for when his body has 
been thus disposed of, his boats are literally burnt behind 
him, and his power of holding back is greatly diminished. 

2. Whether the dense body is burnt, or allowed to 
decay slowly in the usual loathsome manner, or indefinitely 
preserved as an Egyptian mummy, the etheric double 
pursues its own line of quiet disintegration entirely un- 
affected ; still cremation is advisable from a sanitary point 
of view, aS it averts many dangers to the living by the 
swift dissociation of the physical remnants. 

3. Cremation entirely prevents any attempt at 
partial and unnatural temporary reunion of the principles 
by the galvanising of the etheric corpse in the neighbour- 
hood of the dense body just after death, or at the grave 
even after burial. 

4. It entirely prevents any endeavour to make use 
of the corpse for the purposes of the horrible rites of black 
magic, which very seriously affect the condition of the man 
on the astral plane. 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 235 


Q. What then becomes of the man in his destre-body 
after he has shaken off the etheric double and ts separated 
from Prana ? 

Ans. When the physical body is dropped at death, the 
whole arrangement of the sheaths of the personality begins 
to break up, and the astral body commences to disintegrate. 
The desire-elemental, the vague body-consciousness of 
the astral body, mentioned in Chapter ITI, feels it instinc- 
tively and at once takes fright. It fears that it will lose the 
habitation which enables it to remain apart from the rest 
and thus get an unusual opportunity for progress, and that 
the final dissipation of the astral body will end its 
own (elemental) life as a separate entity ; so it immediately 
sets to work to protect itself by a very ingenious method. 
The matter of the astral body is far more fluidic than that 
of the physical, and the elemental, seizing upon its particles, 
rearranges them, so that the rearranged astral body may 
resist as much of encroachment, friction or disintegration 
as its constitution permits, and may therefore retain its 
shape as long as possible. During earth-life the various 
kinds of astral matter intermingle in the formation of the 
astral or desire-body, but the rearrangement consists in the 
separation of its materials according to their densities into 
a series of seven concentric shells—the finest within and 
the densest without—each shell being made of the matter 
of one subplane. 

Q. But how does this rearrangement by the destre- 
elemental affect the dead man ? 

Ans. The physical body acquires its information from 
without by means of certain organs which are specialised 
as instruments of its senses. But the astral body has no 
Separate orgens, and what in the astral body corresponds 
to sight is the power of its molecules to respond to impacts 


236 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


from without which come to them from similar molecules, 
so that a man can perceive an astral object of the matter 
of a particular subdivision only if on the surface of 
his astral body there are particles belonging to that 
subdivision. During physical life all the seven kinds 
of astral matter in his body intermingle and are in 
constant motion like particles of boiling water. At any 
given moment particles of all varieties are represented 
on the surface of his astral body, and therefore when 
he is functioning in that body during sleep, he is able to 
see any astral object of the matter of any subdivision. 
But owing to the rearrangement of the matter of his 
astral body into concentric layers which he ignorantly 
allows his astral elemental to make after death, he is 
confined to one subplane at a time, 7.¢., his consciousness 
receives its impression only through one type of matter 
and thus obtains an exceedingly partial view of the world 
in which his lot is cast. 

Having on the surface of his astral body only the 
lowest and grossest particles, he can receive impressions 
merely from corresponding particles outside. But the 
vibrations of such heavy matter being the expressions 
alone of objectionable feelings and emotions, and of the 
least refined class of astral entities, he can be conscious 
only of that lowest variety of astral matter which corre- 
sponds to the solid down here, and see merely the undesir- 
able inhabitants of the astral world and feel ony its most 
unpleasant and vulgar influences. Other men of quite 
ordinary character who surround him appear to him like 
monsters of vice, since he can see and feel only the 
coarsest inthem. Even his friends, who have passed over 
a few years earlier and have transferred their conscious- 
ness to higher levels, seem not at all what they used to be, 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 237 


because he is now incapable of appreciating any of their 
better qualities. Under these circumstances it is no wonder 
that he considers the astral world a hell; yet the fault is 
in no way with the astral world, but with himself—first, 
for allowing within himself so much of that ruder type of 
astral matter, and secondly, for letting that vague astral 
consciousness dominate him and rearrange that astral 
matter in that particular way. 

In course of time he will pass on to the higher 
subplanes, one after another, with the partial wearing out 
of each of the concentric shells, but the astral life of the 
man is thereby unduly prolonged and the progress of the 
soul retarded. 

QO. You spoke of allowing the rearrangement through 
ignorance ; then cana man prevent it and, by saving himself 
from being confined to the lower subplanes, one after 
another, from below upwards, retain his capactty of seeing 
any astral object of the matter of any subplane ? 

Ans. During hfe he can refuse to gratify his lower 
desires, replace all the low particles by higher and finer 
ones, and thus change the astral matter within him, build- 
ing for himself an astral elemental of a high type. 

Again, the ordinary man having no knowledge of 
these things quietly accepts the rearrangement after death, 
especially as the desire-elemental transfers to him its own 
fear of indescribable danger and destruction ; but the man 
Should simply resist that unreasoning sense of dread by 
a calm assertion of knowledge, and declining to permit the 
case-hardening, which would confine him to a single 
subplane, he should insist upon keeping open his com- 
munications with the higher astral levels as well. He can 
thus escape the thraldom of the desire-elemental by slowly 
but steadily wearing out its resistance ; and being then in 


238 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


practically the same position as that in which he used to 
function when he passed into the astral world in sleep 
during earth-life, he will be able to move about freely and 
to retain his power of seeing the whole of the astral world 
as before, and not merely the grosser and baser part of it. 
Then he can also help his friends by showing them how 
to liberate themselves. The habit of turning the thoughts 
inwards in meditation and the practice of directing the 
emotions by the will and intellect also prevent this “ shell- 
ing,” which is not usual among self-controlled people. 

Q. What, then, ts the state of an ordinary man in 
Kamaloka immediately after death ? 

Ans. It is not certain that when the man is free from 
his etheric double, he will at once become conscious of the 
astral world, especially if he dies suddenly. For he has in 
him a good deal of the lowest kind of astral matter, and a 
shell of this may be made around him. Yet if he has 
learnt in good time to keep in check sensual desires of 
various kinds, his consciousness will not be in the habit of 
functioning through such matter. In the rearranged 
astral body that matter will gather outside, and will there- 
fore be the only channel open to external impressions. Not 
being used to receiving this order of vibrations, the man 
cannot now develop all at once the power to function 
consciously through it and may therefore remain uncon- 
scious of all the unpleasantness of that lowest subplane, 
until that gross matter gradually wears away, and some 
matter which he is in the habit of using comes to the 
surface. Such an occlusion, however, is scarcely ever 
complete, for even in the most carefully made shell 
some particles of the finer matter occasionally find their 
way to the surface, and give him flitting glimpses of his 
surroundings. 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 239 


Normally a dead man is unconscious until he has 
freed himself from the etheric double, and so when he 
awakens to a new life it is that of the astral plane. 
But some men, through ignorance, cling so desperately 
to physical existence, that they will not relax their hold 
upon the etheric double after death. They feel that that is 
at least some sort of link with the only world that they 
know. They may be successful in so retaining their hold 
for a considerable time, but only at the cost of great dis- 
comfort to themselves. The etheric double being only a 
part of the physical vehicle and not a vehicle in itself—a 
body to live and function in—such men cannot come fully 
into touch with the world of ordinary earth-life for want 
of physical sense-organs, while they are not conscious 
of the astral world owing to the shell of the etheric matter 
which surrounds them. They are thus shut out from both 
worlds, and find themselves surrounded by a dense grey 
mist, through which they see very dimly the things of the 
physical world, but with all the colour gone from them. 
Struggling terribly to maintain their position, they drift 
about in this condition of loneliness and misery, until from 
Sheer fatigue their hold fails them, and they slip into the 
comparative happiness of astral life. Sometimes in their 
desperation they grasp blindly at other bodies—a baby 
body or even the body of an animal—and try to enter into 
them, and occasionally they are successful in such an 
attempt, though at the cost of further suffering to them- 
selves in the near future. All this trouble and unhappiness, 
arising entirely from ignorance, can never happen to one 
who understands something of the conditions and laws of 
the life after death. 

An ordinary man awaking on the astral plane after 
death will notice but little difference from what he has 


240 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


been familiar with in the physical world. The astral world 
stretches to a little less than the mean distance of the orbit 
of the moon as explained in Chapter II, and the types of 
matter of the different subdivisions interpenetrate with per- 
fect freedom, with a general tendency for the denser matter 
to settle towards the centre, whereby though the various 
subdivisions do not lie one above the other like the coats 
of an onion, the arrangement of the matter of those sub- 
divisions partakes somewhat of that character. 

The man who has not allowed rearrangement in his 
astral body has freedom of the whole astral world and can 
float about in any direction at will, though he generally 
stays in the neighbourhood to which he is accustomed, 
that is, where his interests lie. 

Again, astral matter interpenetrates physical matter 
as though the latter were not there ; still each subdivision 
of physical matter has a strong attraction for astral matter 
of the corresponding subdivision. Hence every physical 
body has its astral counterpart, and the dead man is thus 
able to perceive his house, room, furniture, relatives and 
friends. The living think of the dead friend as lost, but that 
friend, though not seeing the physical bodies of the living, 
sees their astral bodies, z.e., the astral counterparts cor- 
responding exactly to the outlines of the physical bodies. 
He is thus aware of the presence of his friends, though he 
cannot make any impression upon them when they are 
awake with their consciousness in the physical world, nor 
communicate with them or read their higher thoughts. 
He can also see their emotions by the change in colour in 
their astral bodies. The friends, too, when asleep, 
are conscious in the astral world and can communicate 
with the dead one as freely as during physical life, though 
they may again forget everything when awake. 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 241 


A man is in no way changed by death, but is in 
every respect the same man minus his physical body. His 
thoughts, desires and emotions are exactly the same, and 
his happiness or misery depends upon the extent to which 
the loss of the physical body affects him. He often does not 
believe he is dead as he sees the old familiar objects and 
friends about him, but the realisation comes as he finds 
that he cannot always communicate with them. He 
speaks to them even at once after death, and they do not 
seem to hear; he tries to touch them but finds himself 
making no impression onthem. For a time he persuades 
himself that he is dreaming, but gradually discovers that 
after all he is dead. 

Then he usually begins to become uneasy because 
of the defective teaching which he has received. He does 
not understand where he is, or what has happened, since 
his situation is not what he expected from the orthodox 
standpoint. As an English general once said in a similar 
condition: “ But if I am dead, where am I? If this is 
heaven, I don’t think much of it; and if it is hell, it is 
better than I expected.” 

A great deal of totally unnecessary uneasiness and 
even acute suffering has been thus caused by the baseless 
and blasphemous hell-fire theory, for it has worked evil 
beyond the grave as well as on this side. But presently the 
man will meet with an astral helper, or some other dead 
person who has been more sensibly instructed, and will 
learn from him that there is no cause for fear, and that 
there is a rational life to be lived in this new world, just 
as there was in the old. 

He will find by degrees that there is very much that 
is new, as well as much that is a counterpart of what he 


already knows; for in this astral world thoughts and. 
81 


242 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


desires express themselves in visible forms, though they 
are composed mostly of the finer matter of the plane. 
These become more and more prominent as his astral life 
proceeds and as he withdraws further and further into 
himself. As time passes, he pays less and less attention to 
the lower matter which forms the counterparts of physical 
objects, and is occupied more and more with that higher 
matter of which thought-forms are built—so far, that is, as 
thought-forms appear on the astral plane at all. So his 
life becomes more and more a life in a world of thought, 
and the counterpart of the world which he has left fades 
from his view—not that he has changed his location in space, 
but that his interest is shifting its centre. His desires still 
persist, and the forms surrounding him will be very largely 
the expression of these desires, and whether his life is one 
of happiness or discomfort will depend chiefly upon the 
nature of these. 

The whole astral life after death is a constant and 
steady process of withdrawal by the ego into himself, and 
when in course of time the soul reaches the limit of that 
plane, he dies to it in just the same way as he died to the 
physical plane. That is to say, he casts off the body of 
that plane and leaves it behind him, passing on to the 
higher and still fuller life of the heaven-world. 

Q. What are the surroundings of the astral world ? 

Ans. To a large extent people make their own 
surroundings there. The astral world, as explained in 
Chapter II, is divided into seven subdivisions. These fall 
into three classes; and counting from the highest, sub- 
divisions one, two and three form one class, and four, five 
and six another, the seventh standing alone. As explained 
before, though these subdivisions interpenetrate freely, the 
matter of the higher subdivisions is found on the whole at 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 243 


a greater elevation above the surface of the earth than the 
bulk of the matter of the lower subdivisions. Thus 
though any person on that plane can move on it anywhere, 
his natural tendency is to float at a level corresponding to 
the specific gravity of the heaviest matter in his astral 
body. A man who has not permitted the rearrangement 
in his astral body can float anywhere at will, but the man 
who has submitted to that rearrangement is confined to 
only one level, not because he cannot rise to the highest 
or sink to the lowest, but because he is able to sense clearly 
only that subplane, the matter of which at that time hap- 
pens to be on the outermost of the concentric shells of his 
astral body. 

The lowest or seventh subplane, the astral slum 
with its gloomy and _ depressing atmosphere below 
the surface of the earth, is the most hideous and re- 
pulsive, and is populated by the scum of humanity— 
murderers, ruffians, drunkards and _ profligates—floating 
in darkness and cut off from the other dead, though only 
those are conscious there who are guilty of brutal crimes 
or deliberate cruelty or possessed of evil appetites. Persons 
of a generally better type, t.e., suicides who had sought 
self-murder to escape the penalties of crimes, are also 
found there. 

Subdivisions four, five and six may be said to be 
the astral double of the physical. The great majority of 
people make some stay on the sixth which is simply like 
physical life minus the physical body and its necessities, 
while the fifth and fourth are merely etherealised copies of 
the sixth, and life is less material there. 

The first, second and third levels, though occupying 
the same space, give the idea of being much further 
removed from the physical, as men inhabiting them lose 


244 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


sight of the earth and its belongings and are deeply self- 
absorbed. 

The third region is the summerland of the spiritual- 
ists where the dead, by the power of their thought, call 
into existence schools and churches and temples, houses 
and cities, or beautiful scenery like pleasant flower-gardens, 
lovely lakes and magnificent mountains. These are mere 
collective creations of thought, but people live there con- 
tented for years. 

The second section is the material heaven of the 
ignorantly orthodox, the habitat of the selfish or unspiritual 
religionist who wears here his golden crown and worships 
his own grossly material representation of the particular 
deity of his time and country. It is the happy hunting- 
ground of the Red Indian, the Valhalla of the Norseman, 
the houri-filled paradise of the Muslim, the golden jewelled- 
gated new Jerusalem of the Christian, the lyceum-filled 
heaven of the materialistic reformer. 

The first or the highest region is occupied by in- 
tellectual men and women pronouncedly materialistic, or 
wanting to gain knowledge by physical modes of study, 
from motives of selfish ambition or for the sake of intellec- 
tual exercise. Many politicians, statesmen and men of 
science are to be found there. 

The astral life is the result of all feelings which 
have in them the element of self. If they have been direct- 
ly selfish, they bring their owner into conditions of great 
unpleasantness in the astral world ; if, though tinged with 
thoughts of self, they have been good and kindly, they 
bring him a comparatively pleasant though still limited 
astral life. Such of his thoughts and feelings as have been 
entirely unselfish produce their result in his life in the 
mental world; therefore that life in the mental world 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 245 


cannot be other than blissful. The astral life, which the 
man has made either miserable or comparatively joyous 
for himself, corresponds to what Christians call purgatory ; 
while the lower mental life, which is always entirely happy, 
is what is called heaven. 

Q. Then is there no hell ? 

Ans. Man makes for himself his own purgatory or 
heaven, which are not places, but only states of conscious- 
ness. Hell does not exist and is only a figment of the 
theological imagination. The ordinary belief of the 
Christian in eternal fire and everlasting punishment is 
nothing but a peculiarly pernicious superstition taught by 
the medieval monks. The only thing which, from the 
Christian point of view, ought to be of any importance is 
what the Christ Himself said on the subject. There are 
eight passages in which He is supposed to mention 
eternal punishment, and every one of these eight instances 
can be quite plainly shown to have nothing to do with the 
popular idea which is attributed to them. There isa 
book called Salvator Mundi, written by a Christian 
clergyman, the Rev. Sandal Cox, who goes very care- 
fully into the original Greek of what the Christ is 
alleged to have said, and explains what the Christ did 
mean, and gives the other words which He must have 
used, if speaking in Greek, in order to fit in with the 
popular interpretation. He had not meant what people 
usually think He meant. That shows that there is no 
rational basis for the belief in everlasting punishment, 
and of course one can refute it also from many other 
points of view. One can say that if there be a God, 
and if He be a loving Father, the cruelty of eternal 
punishment with its apparent injustice is absolutely 
impossible, 


246 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Still there comes a period in human development, 
though not for millions of years yet—the so-called Day of 
Judgment in the middle of the Fifth Round—when the 
young soul or the man who has set himself steadily 
against evolutionary progress does drop out, not into an 
everlasting hell, but into a condition of comparatively 
suspended animation in which he awaits the advent of 
another Gh@{R. of evolution which offers him, in its 
earlier stages, an opportunity of advancement more within 
the limits of his feeble capacities. | 

He is simply in the position of a child who has been 
unable to keep pace with his classmates. He cannot work 
with them through the later and more difficult portion of the 
course of study appointed for the year, so he must wait until, 
at the beginning of the next school-year, another set of boys 
are commencing the studies which he failed to grasp. By 
jOining them, and thus going over the same ground once 
more, he is enabled to succeed where previously he 
succumbed to the difficulties of the path. This is all that 
it means, and may be called eonian condemnation ; for that 
is the real translation of the words which have been so 
grossly misinterpreted ‘‘ eternal damnation’’. It is not a 
damnation at all, not even a condemnation in any bad sense: 
it is simply a suspension for the present zon or dispensa- 
tion. But the diseased imagination of the medizval monk, 
always seeking the opportunity to introduce grotesquely 
aggravated horrors into his creed in order to terrify an 
incredibly ignorant peasantry into more liberal donations 
for the support of Mother Church, distorted this per- 
fectly simple idea of “ zonian suspension ”’ into “ eternal 
damnation ”’, 

Still a man by living foolishly may make for himself 
an unpleasant and long-enduring purgatory, though neither 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 247 


heaven nor hell can be eternal, as a finite cause can produce 
only a finite result. 

QO. What, then, are the conditions severally, in Kama- 
loka, or the astral world, of a very bad man, an ordinary 
man, and a man with some rational interests ? 

Ans. The conditions of after-death life are almost 
infinite in their variety. Every ordinary man who has 
allowed the rearrangement in his astral body after death 
has to pass through the seven subdivisions in turn, though 
every one is not conscious in all of them. An ordinary 
decent person has not in his body sufficient matter of the 
lowest subplane to form a heavy shell. He usually has 
matter of the sixth mixed with a little of the seventh, and 
so after death he ordinarily finds himself viewing the 
counterpart of the physical world. 

But a drunkard or a sensualist who has been in the 
grip of a lust strong enough, during physical life, to over- 
power reason and feelings of decency or family affection, 
finds himself after death in the lowest subdivision of the 
astral world, for his longings had been such as needed a 
physical body for their gratification. Such a craving 
manifests itself as a vibration in the astral body, and 
while he was still in the physical world, most of its strength 
was used up in setting in motion the heavy physical 
particles. But being in the astral world without the 
physical vehicle to deaden and retard the force of the 
desire-vibrations, he feels the appetite perhaps a hundred 
times more strongly, yet is absolutely unable to satisfy it 
for want of a physical body ; and then life is a real hell, the 
Only hell there is. Yet he is reaping the perfectly natural 
result of his own action and no external power is punishing 
him. Here mcst of the suffering results from the non- 
Satisfaction of vicious desires strengthened and encouraged 


248 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


while in the physical body; the sinner is his own execu- 
tioner. All this was perfectly well known in the ancient 
world, even among the Greeks, by whom it is clearly imaged 
in the myth of Tantalus, who suffered always from a 
raging thirst, yet was doomed forever to see the water 
recede just as it was about to touch his lips. 

A murderer, living through the scenes of the 
murder and the subsequent events over and over again in 
Kamaloka, ever repeating his diabolical act and going 
through the terrors of his arrest and execution, is expe- 
riencing hell indeed; fire and brimstone are mere stage 
properties in comparison. In many cases the murderer, 
while going over and over again in thought the crime 
which he has committed, will, by such ceaseless round of 
half malevolent, half horror-stricken meditation, produce 
something in the nature of a haunting at the scene of his 
violent deed. 

But none of these conditions are eternal and none are 
punitive. They are the inevitable working out of causes 
set in motion in the physical world, and conditions only last 
while their causes endure. In course of time the force of 
desire wears out, but only at the cost of terrible suffering to 
the man, and as in the astral world time can be measured 
by means of sensations alone, there being no other time- 
measure such as we have in the physical world, each day 
seems to him somewhat like a thousand years. The 
blasphemous idea of eternal damnation seems to be a 
distortion of this fact. 

The fate of Sisyphus of Greek mythology typifies 
exactly the after-life of the man of worldly ambition. The 
former was condemned forever to roll a heavy rock up to 
the summit of a mountain, only to see it roll down again 
the moment success seemed within his reach. The man 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 249 


of selfish ambition has all his life been in the habit of 
forming selfish plans, and hence he continues to do so in 
the astral world; he carefully builds up the plan till it is 
perfect in his mind, and only then finds out that he has 
lost the physical body which is necessary for its achievement. 
Down falls his hope; yet so ingrained is the habit that 
he continues again and again to roll this same stone up 
the same mountain of ambition until such time as the 
vice is completely worn out. Then at last he realises 
that he need not roll up his rock, and he lets it rest in peace 
at the bottom of the hill. 

Now take the case of an ordinary colourless man 
who has no particular vice, but who is still attached to 
things of the physical world—who has had no ideas 
beyond gossip or what is called sport, who has thought of 
nothing beyond his business or his dress, and whose life has 
been devoted merely to making money or to aimless social 
functions. The astral world is a place of weariness for 
him, because the things he craves for are not possible to 
him as there are no business engagements in that world, 
and no conventionalities upon which society in the 
physical world is based. 

Yet for all but a very small minority, the state after 
death is happier than the life upon earth, since it Is no 
longer needful to earn a living. The astral body feels 
neither hungry nor cold, nor suffers from disease, and 
each man in the astral world, by the mere exercise of his 
thought, clothes himself as he wishes. For the first time 
Since early childhood the man is entirely free to spend the 
whole of his time in doing exactly what he likes. 

Men with similar tastes and pursuits drift naturally 
together there just as they do on the physical plane, and 


there is no lack of profitable occupatior for a man with 
82 


250 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


rational interests, provided they do not need a physical 
body for their expression. A lover of the beauties of 
nature can travel rapidly, about a hundred miles per 
second, without fatigue, to the loveliest spots in the world ; 
another delighting in art has the world’s masterpieces at 
his disposal, while a student of science has libraries and 
laboratories of the world open to him. He can visit all 
scientific men and catch their thoughts. For aman who 
during earth-life has learnt to delight in unselfish actions 
and to work for the good of others, this world will be one 
of the most vivid joy and the most rapid progress. Toa 
man who is both intelligent and helpful, who understands 

the conditions of this non-physical existence and takes the 

trouble to adapt himself to them, it opens a splendid 

vista of opportunities alike for acquiring fresh knowledge 

and for doing useful work. In fact, he may do more 

good in a few years of that astral existence than ever he 

could have done in the longest physical life. Thus there 

are ample possibilities both for enjoyment and progress 

there. 

Q. What of the after-death conditions of thase who dite 
by accident or who have commutted suicide ? 

Ans. In the first class, there is a great variety; in the 
second, the definite life- period has to be lived out. It is the 
period fixed for the working out of the karma of that life 
as already explained in Chapter V in connection with the 
exact time and manner of a man’s death. 

When death is by accident, it is not infrequently 
the ending planned by the Lords of Karma for that 
incarnation ; but sometimes it is not so intended, and the 
accident is therefore an interference by new forces brought 
to bear on the life—an exercise of initiative by the individu- 
al himself (when he chooses to pay a debt, before it is due, 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 251 


as stated before,) or by others whose actions directly affect 
him. In such a case, the disturbed plan will be adjusted 
in the beginning of the next life, so that there will not be 
in the end anything lost to the soul whose destiny has been 
changed for the moment by himself or by others. But in 
no case is suicide ever in the plan of a man’s life; for such 
an act the man is directly responsible, though that responsi- 
bility may also be shared by others. 

In the case of those who die either from old age 
or disease, the hold of earthly desires is sure to be 
more or less weakened, and probably the very grossest 
particles are already got rid of, so that the man will 
most likely find himself on the sixth or fifth—or perhaps 
even a higher—subdivision of the astral plane ; the princi- 
ples have gradually been prepared for separation, and the 
shock is therefore not great. 

But in the case of accidental death or suicide 
none of these preparations have taken place, and the 
withdrawal of the principles from their physical encasement 
has been very aptly compared to the tearing of the stone 
out of an unripe fruit ; a great deal of the grossest kind 
of astral matter still clings around the personality, which 
is consequently held in the seventh or lowest subdivision 
of the plane. 

The victims of sudden death whose earth-lives have 
been noble and pure have no affinity for this plane, and so 
the time of their sojourn upon it is passed either in ‘“‘ happy 
ignorance and full oblivion, or in a state of quiet slumber, 
a sleep full of rosy dreams”. But if their earth- 
lives have been low and brutal, selfish and sensual, they 
will, like the suicides, be conscious to the fullest extent in 
this undesirabie region, and are liable to develop into 
terribly evil entities. 


252 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


The ordinary suicide is committed either from 
weakness or cowardice—due to a momentary despair, 
or a shock which the person is not strong enough to 
bear, or a sudden misfortune coming upon him from some 
wrong action which he fears will be discovered and the 
penalty of which he wishes to escape. It is sometimes 
the deliberate, but often the hurried, action of aman who 
is trying to get out of a trouble and escape from it. 

Yet he cannot escape from it. When he has struck 
away his body, he is wide awake on the other side of death, 
exactly the same man as he was a moment before, except 
that his physical body is thrown off ; he is no more changed 
than if he had merely taken off hiscoat. The thing which 
drove him to suicide was mental or emotional, as the 
case may be. He has not got rid either of his mind or 
his emotions. All that part of him that drove him to 
suicide is there; it was not a mere bodily action. The 
result of his losing the physical body is that his capacity 
for suffering is very much increased. He is subject to the 
same forces as those which may have driven him to 
suicide. There is, however, one peculiarity in relation to 
it, that he generally goes through ‘in imagination,” as we 
call it, all that led up to the point when he killed himself, 
repeats automatically the feelings of despair and fear 
which preceded the self-murder, and goes through the 
act and death-struggle with ghastly persistence. 

That curious automatic effect, the repeating of a 
thing over and over again in Kamaloka, is also a character- 
istic of the murderer when he passes over, as mentioned 
above, whether the murder is found out or not. Of 
course if he is found out and hanged, then it takes place 
in rapid sequence. That is also one of the ways in which 
the savage learns that murder is wrong. In his case, it 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 253 


cannot be said to be much of a crime as he kills without 
thinking; yet he has to learn that murder is a thing he 
must not do. So, in the post-mortem life, he has a short 
suffering of this kind, short because there was very little 
mental effort behind, and because there was merely the 
sudden emotion, leading to the commission of that action. 
That is part of the useful instruction which helps in the 
evolution of the savage : he learns that murder is wrong by 
finding that it works out painfully for him. But of course 
those who are more evolved would suffer for a very much 
longer period if they committed a similar offence. 

The folly in suicide is that people erroneously 
expect to escape life, and then they find themselves still 
alive. That is the futility of the whole thing. Suicide 
depends chiefly upon ignorance. If people be convinced 
that they cannot escape, that the results of actions are 
inevitable, that will work upon their minds when there is 
a sudden impulse to suicide from the desire to escape. 
They cannot escape, but, on the contrary, fall, as it were, 
from the frying-pan into the fire; they have to suffer there 
more than on the physical plane, because they are working 
in subtler matter, in which the impact of feeling, owing to 
less of wastage in moving the light astral matter, is 
Stronger in its effect upon consciousness than on the 
physica] plane. 

The suicide is very apt to turn up at a spiritualistic 
Seance. He may be induced by the people who try 
to help him on the other side of death, to accept the 
inevitable results of his action patiently and quietly; 
but often he rejects the good advice and attempts to 
regain a hold upon life by wrongful means. Such a man— 
as well as a victim of sudden death whose earth-life has 
been brutal, selfish and sensual—inflamed with all kinds of 


254 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


horrible appetites which he can no longer satisfy now that 
he is without a physical body, often tries to gratify his 
earthly yearnings and loathsome passions vicariously 
through a living proxy—a medium or any sensitive 
person—whom he can obsess. Unfortunately if he 
succeeds in doing so, he is enabled to prolong enormously 
his dreadful astral life and to renew for perhaps an 
indefinite period his power to generate evil karma and 
so prepares for himself a future incarnation of the most 
degraded character, besides running the risk of losing 
a large portion of such mind-power as he may happen 
to possess. But if he is fortunate enough not to meet 
with a sensitive through whom his passions can be vicari- 
ously gratified, the unfulfilled desires will gradually burn 
themselves out, and the suffering caused in the process will 
probably go far towards working off the evil karma of the 
past life. 
But it must be remembered that the guilt of suicide 
differs considerably according to circumstances, from the 
morally blameless act of Seneca or Socrates, or from a 
suicide which has been committed from a noble motive and 
is an act of love and self-sacrifice, through all degrees 
down to the heinous crime of the wretch who takes his 
own life in order to escape from the entanglements into 
which his villany has involved him; and of course the 
position after death varies accordingly. 

Q. If there ts no hell, what ts the use of so much ter- 
rible suffering in the astral world ? How does the system 
of purgation help the man ? 

Ans. There is no hell, no senseless, useless eternity of 
torment for the mere gratification of the cruel malignity of 
an irresponsible despot in which orthodox theology asks 
its devotees to believe ; but there is a purgatory which is 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 255 


simply the necessary, the only effective and therefore the 
most merciful process for the elimination of evil desires. 
Terrible though the suffering may be, any evil desire 
gradually wears itself out, and only when all evil desires 
have done so, can the man pass on into the higher life of 
the heaven-world. 

Because a particular evil desire is burnt out, 
the man is definitely freed from it, and he need not 
take up the burden of it again in his next incarnation 
unless he wills it. Though the desire itself is dead, there 
still remains the same weakness of character which made 
it possible for him to succumb to it. In his next life he 
will be born with an astral vehicle containing such matter 
as is necessary for the expression of the same desire—with, 
so to speak, an outfit which would enable him to repeat 
his last life in that respect. He receives that matter 
because in his last incarnation he sought it and made use 
of it; but though he is provided with it this time, he is in 
no way bound to employ it in the same way as before. If 
from the result of his previous actions he should have the 
good fortune to find himself as a child in the hands of 
careful and capable parents, and so be trained to regard 
such a desire as evil, and to gain control over it and re- 
press it as it appears, then the matter which would have ex- 
pressed it will remain unvivified and gradually become atro- 
phied for want of use, like many of our physical muscles. 

The matter of the astral body is slowly but con- 
Stantly wearing away and being replaced, precisely as is 
that of the physical body; and as that which is atrophied 
disappears, it will be replaced by matter of a more refined 
order which is incapable of responding to the strong, coarse 
vibrations of that grossly sensual desire, and thus that 
particular abomination will become impossible to him. He 


256 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


will, in fact, have grown beyond it and finally conquered 
it, so that never again in all his long series of future lives 
will he repeat that mistake, for he has now built into his 
ego the opposite virtue of complete self-control as far as 
that vice is concerned. Through a life of successful 
struggle against that desire the victory over it has been 
won; and now there is no longer a struggle, for he sees 
the vice in its true colours and it has not the slightest 
attraction for him. Thus the suffering on the astral 
plane which once seemed, and was, so terrible to him, has 
been in reality a blessing in disguise, since through it he has 
been enabled to gain this immense moral victory, to take 
this decided step upon the path of evolution ; and so far 
there seems no other method than that of suffering by which 
such splendid results could possibly have been achieved. 

Q. If there be no hell, how do you explain the Christian 
doctrine of ‘ Salvation’ ? 

Ans. Salvation (L. Salvus, saved) is not escape from 
eternal damnation or from the mythical hell. To 
be saved means really to be on the right side when a 
certain division of the human race takes place in the 
future, on the Day of Judgment, as mentioned before ; 
that division has been described as the separation between 
the sheep and the goats, the saved and the lost. There 
cannot be any such idea as “the lost”’ in the whole of 
God’s world, because God intends us all to evolve ; and 
evolve we most certainly shall. But the question is whether 
we have attained individualisation early enough, and also 
whether we shall choose to go willingly along the path of 
evolution or whether we shall give ourselves and others a 
great deal of trouble by resisting the divine guidance. 

That is the only meaning of salvation—that a man 
is sure to come out on the right side in that future 


' LIFE AFTER DEATH 257 


judgment—a decision as to whether he is or is not ready to 
go on in the higher and more evolved world. If he is not, 
he drops out and goes on with the next wave of evolution, 
like the child at school, mentioned before, who not being 
up to the level of his standard, is unable to go on toa 
higher class with his comrades but has to wait and do the 
same year’s work over again. 

As regards the progress that lies before us in this 
particular chain of worlds, the great majority of us are by 
no means yet what is technically called ‘safe’ or ‘saved ’. 
We reach that desirable position only when we have 
become members of the Great White Brotherhood which 
lasts from eternity to eternity, by passing the First Great 
Initiation as explained in Chapter X. 

Those familiar with the Christian teaching will 
remember how the great Initiate, S. Paul, pointed out that 
it was the intention of the Christian religion to bring about 
the birth of the Christ within the individual believer, and 
that the Christ-child, thus born in the human spirit, was 
to grow and develop until the full stature of the Christ 
was reached in man. There is within each one of usa 
Christ principle, which as yet in most of us lies dormant ; 
but it can be awakened, and the awakening of that Christ 
principle is the birth of the Christ within the heart of each 
man. We find in the Christian Scripture “ Christ in you, 
the hope of glory,’’ and it is the presence of that Christ 
principle within each heart that brings the hope of glory 
to every human soul. That principle is closely connected 
with the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity, that Son 
of God who became incarnate, who descended into flesh 
and became Himself part of us in order that through Him 
we might rise to greater glory. Without that Christ 
principle we should indeed be lost, and belief in that true 


258 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Christ is necessary for salvation. As one Angelus Silesius 
in the seventeenth century has said: 


“Though Christ were yearly born in Bethlehem, 
and never 

Had birth in yourself, then were you lost for ever ; 

And if within yourself it is not reared again, 

The Cross at Golgotha can save you not from pain.” 

And it is the belief, the certainty, that the Christ- 

power is within each one of us which will enable us to 
reach that stage of safety, and to live the life which we 
ought to live. In that sense it is true to say that belief in 
the Christ is necessary for salvation, but it is the Christ 
within ourselves in whom we must believe. Belief in the 
mere story of a life lived by the Christ on the physical 
plane cannot possibly affect our future. It is the knowledge 
of the Divine within man, and its power to respond to the 
Divine without, which will save us and help and strengthen 


us ON Our way. 
“ We all may be 
The Saviours of the world, if we believe 
In the Divinity which dwells in us 
And worship it.” 

The birth of the Christ within the heart of man is a 
very real thing. In that sense we may truly say that the 
Christ is the Saviour of the World, for it is only then that 
man can attain that which God meant him to attain, and 
entering consciously into the glory and the fulness of the 
Christ Himself, realise the God within. 

Thus the development of the Christ principle within 
us is necessary for escape from recurring births and deaths. 
As that principle unfolds, we realise that our separate 
consciousness is nothing but an illusion—that we are all one 
in God. And as we realise that Fatherhood of God, we 
realise also the true Brotherhood of Man. 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 259 


That awakening of the Christ principle is also called 
the attainment of the Buddhic consciousness. Saints 
in their moments of bliss unconsciously touch the glory of 
that wonderful consciousness and realise the Christ within 
them. But there are others who set themselves deliber- 
ately and scientifically to gain this splendour and con- 
sciously enter into the glory and the fulness of the Christ, 
realising the God in man because they themselves are 
consciously part of that God whom they realise. That is 
the true birth of Christ within the heart of man. The true 
man, being a spark of the Divine Flame, is already divine 
and needs no salvation. All he wants is to be able to 
realise himself in all the worlds and at all possible levels 
and to be a channel of the Divine Power in the carrying 
out of the Divine Plan. 

Among the eastern nations salvation carries the idea 
of the escape from sorrow and evil to the condition of being 
safe—the escape from repeated incarnations, from the wheel 
of birth and death, from what the schools of Orphism in 
the sixth century B.c. called the ‘ Circle of Generation,” 
from what the Buddhists call the Sansdara, the Wheel 
of Life. 

Q. On what factors does @ man’s detention tn any 
sectton of the astral world depend? In what time and 
how does an ordinary man pass from the astral to the 
heaven-warld ? 

Ans. The ego steadily withdraws all his forces into 
himself, leaving behind him section after section of 
astral matter. His detention in any section is in propor- 
tion to the amount of matter of that section present in 
his astral body, that proportion depending on the life 
lived, the desires indulged in and the kind of matter thus 
attracted and built into the body. 


260 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Therefore a man can, by pure living and high 
thinking, so minimise the quantity of matter belonging to 
the lower astral levels which he attaches to himself, and 
so raise it in each case to what may be called its critical] 
point, that the first touch of disintegrating force would 
shatter its cohesion and resolve it into its original condition, 
leaving him free at once to pass on to the next sub-plane. 

His attitude of mind after death also influences his 
stay there, as by understanding his position and fixing his 
attention on spiritual matters he can facilitate astral 
disintegration and cut short his sojourn on the lower levels. 

In the case of a thoroughly spiritually-minded 
person who has purified his astral body with the constitu- 
ents drawn from the finest grades of each division of astral 
matter, the condition of the critical stage, mentioned above, 
would be attained with reference to all the subdivisions of 
astral matter, and the result would be a practically 
instantaneous passage through that plane, so _ that 
consciousness would be recovered for the first time in the 
heaven-world. A less developed but pure and temperate 
man will pass through that plane less swiftly, though 
dreaming peacefully, unconscious of his surroundings, till 
having thrown off one astral shell after another he awakens 
in the heaven-world. Of course as stated before, the sub- 
planes interpenetrate one another and are not divided 
from one another in space, so when it is said that a person 
passes from one sub-division to another, it does not mean 
that he moves in space at all, but simply that the focus of 
his consciousness shifts from the outer shell to the one next 
within it. 

The average time taken by different classes of persons 
in the astral world has been already given at the end of 
Chapter IV. 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 261 


Finding himself in the sixth section, still hovering 
about the places and persons with which he was most 
closely connected while on earth, the average man, as time 
passes on, finds the earthly surroundings gradually growing 
dimmer and of less and less importance to him, and 
thenceforward tends more and more to mould his entourage 
into agreement with the more persistent of his thoughts. 
By the time that he reaches the third level he finds that 
this characteristic has entirely superseded the vision of 
the realities of the astral world. 

When all the lower emotions and desires with the 
thoughts of a selfish nature have worn themselves out, and 
the ego with his steady process of withdrawal has passed 
even beyond the finest kind of astral matter, there comes 
a: time when the astral body, not entirely disintegrated, is 
finally shaken off by an astra] death, and the soul, except 
that of an unusually wicked man who has no spark of love 
or kindness for another or who has slipped into irredeem- 
able sin and bestiality, has a kind of gestation period and 
sinks into a brief, peaceful, dreamy “ predevachanic un- 
consciousness’ to be awakened by a sense of intense bliss 
into that part of the heaven-world to which he belongs by 
his nature. There is not necessarily a movement in space, 
but the man’s consciousness is now focussed into the lower 
mental world, where are found also those animals who, 
before death, became “ individualised,’ and attained to the 
Stature of a human soul. 

Q. If death is not the end of life, but ts only a step 
from one stage of life to another, what about the violent 
grief of those who mourn the loss of their departed dear 
ones 7? 

Ans. Their grief is, as already explained, not for a real 
loss but an apparent one, the result of a delusion and 


262 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


ignorance of nature’s laws, and represents unnecessary 
suffering to the mourners themselves. The departed one 
is still with them, and while their physical bodies are 
asleep, they talk with him; but as soon as they are awake, 
they revert to the old delusion that they have lost him 
and think thoughts of sorrow all day long, making the 
dead man very miserable and unhappy in that emotional 
world. 

Not only that, but uncontrolled grief and wild 
outbursts of sorrow produce a very painful effect on the 
departed one when he is sinking peacefully into the un- 
consciousness which precedes his awakening into the glory 
of the heaven-world. He is often aroused from his 
dreamy happiness into a remembrance of the last earth- 
life by the passionate sorrow and desires of his friends on 
earth, which awaken corresponding vibrations of sorrow 
with a hundredfold strength in his liberated desire-body, 
causing him great discomfort and depression, and very 
seriously delay his onward progress. 

Again, this unrestricted grief of ignorant, though 
well-meaning, relations puts great obstacles in the way of 
astral helpers who try to help the dead by explaining to 
them the conditions of the astral world and to cheer and 
comfort them in their new surroundings. 

Forgetfulness is not counselled, but the remem- 
brance should take a form which is helpful and not 
harmful, and the selfish unavailing regret should be substi- 
tuted by earnest and loving good wishes for perpetual light 
and eternal peace. 

Q. Then have prayers for the dead any value ? If so, 
how should they be offered ? 

Ans. Prayers always have value for the living as well 
as for the dead as they are dictated by love; but a 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 263 


prayer is efficacious in proportion to the concentration 
of thought expressed in it, the purity and strength of 
the will by which it is directed to the person concerned, 
and the knowledge possessed by its utterer. A prayer, 
like a thought, creates a form, an artificial elemental, 
‘‘an active beneficent power,’’ which goes to the person 
for whose benefit it has been called into existence, and 
helps him as opportunity occurs. This energy expended 
on the astral plane can affect any person in the astral 
body, and a dead man can be helped and protected by 
such thought-forms so long as he remains in the astral 
world. 

A man with knowledge, understanding the constitu- 
tion of the astral body and the power of thought, can 
enormously increase his aid by deliberately sending an 
artificial elemental to assist in the disintegration of the 
astral shells which imprison the soul, and thus help the 
quickening of his passage towards Devachan. Some of 
the mantras of the Hindu Shraddhas (ceremonies for the 
dead) have this object in view and are very efficacious 
when employed by a holy and wise man. 

But the ordinary man knows so little of the condition 
of the dear ones who have passed away, that he might well 
fear to set in motion a force which might be ill-directed for 
want of more exact knowledge of their need. Such a one 
cannot do better than use that beautiful antiphon which 
appears so often in the services for the dead by the 
Christian Catholic Church: “ Eternal rest grant unto him, 
O Lord, and let light perpetual shine upon him.” For its 
two clauses express exactly the conditions which are most 
desirable for the dead; first, perfect rest from all earthly 
thought and care, so that his progress towards the heaven- 
world may be undisturbed; and secondly, the perpetual 


264 | THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


light of divine love shining clearly upon him througt 
the higher and more spiritual part of his own nature, 
drawing him ever upward towards itself, so that his progress 
may be rapid. Truly the earth has little more of assistance 
to give to a man for whom such a prayer is being earnestly 
and constantly offered. In this way anyone can help his 
dead friends or dear ones by raising himself to a higher 
level—forgetting himself and the delusion of his apparent 
loss—sending thoughts of “ perpetual light and eternal 
peace,” and substituting selfish and unavailing regret by 
earnest and loving good wishes for their swift progress 
from the astral to the heavenly world. 

Q. Can we do anything to help a person about to die ? 
If so, how and when ? 

Ans. We can certainly do a great deal to help him. 
If we have access to him physically during his illness, we 
can explain to him the conditions after death, and a 
rational explanation of these with a confident and cheery 
talk about the life beyond the grave will greatly relieve 
his mind. 

If, however, physical communication is impossible, 
the dying man can be acted upon from the astral plane. 
One should fix the intention of aiding that particular 
person in his mind before going to sleep with arguments to 
be presented. The main object of the helper is to calm 
and encourage the sufferer and induce him to realise that 
death is a perfectly natural process, and to explain to him 
the nature of the astral plane and the preparations neces- 
sary for progress towards the heaven-world. 

The helper himself must have the qualifications 
of single-mindedness in the work of helping, perfect self- 
control over his temper and nerves, perfect calmness, 
serenity and joyousness, knowledge of higher planes and 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 265 


unselfishness with a heart filled with love—if he would 
help effectively the dying and the dead. 

The dead may be unconscious after death fora 
moment or a few minutes, hours, days, or even weeks, and 
though a trained person can observe it for himself, an 
untrained man should be ready to help several successive 
nights in order not to fail when the dead man regains his 
consciousness on the astra! plane. 

Q. Shall we meet our loved ones who have passed on 
before us ? 

Ans. Assuredly we shall, for the attraction will act asa 
magnet and draw us together. If the loved one has died 
recently, we shall find him on the astral plane ; but if he 
has left this earth long ago, he may have passed the 
astral and entered the heaven-world ; and when we our- 
selves reach that world, we shall have him with us, always 
at his best, through our thought-form or mental image, 
vivified by the ego of that friend, as will be explained 
presently. Those whom we have loved are not lost; the 
reunion is sure where affection exists, as love is one of the 
mightiest powers of the universe, whether in life or in 
death. 

Q. Why ts sudden death injurious to a man, and what 
ts the reason of the old prayer of the Church: “ From 
sudden death, good Lord, deliver us” ? 

Ans. The condition of a man’s life after death depends, 
firstly, on the length of time he stays on any subplane, 
and secondly, on the amount of his consciousness upon it, 
while the length of time on any subplane depends on the 
matter of that subplane built into the body. Thus both 
the factors of the post-mortem existence depend not on 
the nature of death, but on the nature of life lived, and no 


accident can affect the man. 
34 


266 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Still, though a sudden death does not necessarily 
affect a man’s position in the astral world for the worse, it 
does nothing to improve it. The slow wasting away of the 
aged or the ravages of lingering disease invariably loosen 
and break up the astral particles, and wear out most of 
the lower desires, so that when a man recovers his con- 
sciousness on the astral plane, much of his work there is 
already done for him by the particles belonging to the 
lower levels already having been burnt out of him, whereas 
a victim of sudden death having a much stronger astral 
body to manage may have his residence slightly prolonged 
on the lowest level of the astral plane. At the same time, 
if he learns to use that life well, it may be productive of 
much more good karma than what he would have been 
able to make in the same time on the physical plane, so 
that there are always two sides of the account to take into 
consideration. 

Again, the mental terror and agitation in a sudden 
death often persist after death and are not favourable 
preparations for astral life. At our present stage of 
evolution we often spend almost or even quite the 
entire night in revolving and considering the last definite 
thought in our mind before we go to sleep. Similarly, 
the last thought in the mind before death is not 
unimportant, especially in the case of an undeveloped 
person with vague and inchoate astral consciousness, 
as his last thought would occupy his mind for a 
long time, and would to some extent set the key- 
note to which a good deal of his astral life might be 
tuned. Thus it would be worth while taking some trouble 
to see that it is a good one; but this is not possible in the 
case of sudden death. Of course, in the case of ordinarily 
evolved and intelligent people it would be the general tone 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 267 


of the mind—the general trend of their thought—during 
earth-life that would give the key to its probable working 
during astral life, and the particular idea which occupied it 
at the moment of transition from one state to the other 
would not matter much. 

Q. Is the astral world inhabited by others besides the 
dead ? 

Ans. The astral world is inhabited not only by the 
dead, but also by about one-third of the living who have 
temporarily left their physical bodies during sleep. Astral 
matter being very plastic under the influence of thought, 
a man appears in the astral world in the likeness of himself, 
wearing the clothes of which he thinks. It is likewise the 
dwelling-place of Adepts and Their pupils, of psychically 
developed persons not under the guidance of a Master, and 
of black magicians and their chelas. 

That world has also a great number of other human 
inhabitants without physical bodies, some considerably 
above human level, like Nirmanakdayds, pupils of Masters 
awaiting reincarnation, etc., and some below, like astral 
shades and shells of the dead, shells vitalised for black 
magic, dead black magicians and their pupils, etc. 

Non-human beings like the astral elemental essence 
of our evolution and astral bodies of animals also find 
their placethere ; while nature-spirits of various kinds called 
fairies, elves, brownies, fauns, satyrs, goblins, etc., having a 
different line of evolution and usually wearing a miniature 
human form, as well as Devas or angels far higher in 
evolution than man, form a large part of its population. 

Again, it is the habitat of artificial entities, the 
elementals formed unconsciously by ordinary men and 
consciously by Adepts and black magicians, as well as of 
human artificials employed in spiritualistic séances. 


268 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Thus we are neither the only nor the principal 
inhabitants of the astral world, as that world is largely 
inhabited by beings of other lines of evolution running 
parallel with our own, which, though they pass through a 
level corresponding to that of humanity, do not pass 
through humanity at aH. 

The inhabitants of the astral world have their 
senses normally capable of responding to the undulations 
of their own world only. A man living in the physical 
world sees, hears, feels, by vibrations connected with the 
physical matter around him. He ts equally surrounded 
by the astral and mental and other worlds which are 
interpenetrating his own denser world. But he is normally 
unconscious of them because his senses cannot respond to 
the oscillations of their matter, just as our physical eyes 
cannot respond to the vibrations of ultra-violet light. A 
being living in the astral world might be occupying the very 
Same space as a being living in the physical world, yet each 
would be entirely unconscious of the other and would in no 
way impede the free movement of the other. The same is 
true of all the other worlds. We are all along surrounded 
by the worlds of finer matter, as close to us as the world 
we see, and their inhabitants are passing through us and 
about us, but we are entirely unconscious of them. 

Q. What becomes of the astral corpse after the man 
passes on to Devachan ? 

Ans. A man at death separates himself completely 
from the physical body, but an ordinary man identifies 
himself closely with his lower desires during life and thus 
allows the lower Manas to be so entangled with Kama, 
that the ego with all his indrawing force cannot separate 
himself completely from it. So when the man finally 
breaks away from the partially disintegrated astral body, 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 269 


he leaves behind a part of the Manas, imprisoned in and 
entangled with the desire-body. This fragmentary entity, 
called a shade, has thus a certain vitality, and moving 
freely in the astral world with past memories, fragmentary 
consciousness and tendencies to repeat automatically 
familiar vibrations of love, desires and thought without 
intelligence, is often mistaken for the man himself by the 
ignorant at séances. 

At a later stage—in a few hours, or in a few months 
or years, according to the spiritual or material nature 
of the ego who has passed on into the heaven-world— 
the fragmentary consciousness dies out of the astral 
body, though it does not return to the ego to whom it 
belonged, and then the astral corpse without any trace of 
its former life, now called a shell, slowly disintegrates 
in the astral world as did the physical body in its own 
world. 

QO. What then becomes of the man when he passes on to 
Devachan or heaven ? 

Ans. Devachan—the abode of the gods, or the place of 
light or bliss—is a specially guarded part of the mental 
world from which sorrow and evil are kept away by the 
action of certain Devas. 

It is not really a place but a state of consciousness, 
and is here round us at this very moment, as near to us as 
the air we breathe. 

After his second death in the astral world the man 
awakens to a new glory of life and colour, and lives in the 
radiant mental body in the heaven-world. He awakens 
gradually to a sense of joy unspeakable and bliss inde- 
scribable, softest melodies breathing round him, his being 
suffused with light, and the faces loved on earth dawning 
through the golden haze. 


270 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Every ordinary man is, during earth-life, surround- 
ing himself with a mass of thought-forms, those represent- 
ing the main interest of his life growing strong and 
remaining with him even after death. The force of the 
selfish thought-forms, of anger, ambition, pride, greed, 
gluttony, drunkenness, sensuality, etc., pours down into 
astral matter and is exhausted in the astral world when 
the man is burning that lower part of his nature in that 
purgatorial life. But his unselfish thoughts, whether 
purely intellectual or of the nature of love, compassion, 
tenderness, devotion, etc., belong to his mental body, and 
these he carries with him into Devachan, as he can 
appreciate the heaven-world only through these refined 
thoughts. 

Now his mental body is a vehicle which is by no 
means fully developed like the astral, and it shuts him 
out from the mental world about him instead of enabling 
him to see it, as only those parts of his mental body are in 
full working order which he had used in an altruistic manner 
in his earth-life. The high, refined thoughts and noble, 
unselfish aspirations which he poured out during earth- 
life then cluster round him and make a sort of shell about 
him, through the medium of which he can respond to 
certain types of vibrations in the refined matter of the 
mental world. 

These thoughts surrounding him are the powers by 
which he draws upon the wealth of the heaven-world ; and 
though that world is a store-house of infinite extent—all 
glory and beauty conceivable—he can draw upon it Just 
according to his power of unselfish thoughts. Each such 
thought-form is a window through which he looks out from 
his mental body upon the glory and beauty of the mental 
world. If he has chiefly regarded physical things during 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 271 


his earth-life, then he has made for himself but few 
windows through which this higher glory can shine upon 
him. An utterly unselfish and highly evolved soul is all 
windows—has full consciousness here, can move about in 
his mental vehicle as freely as the ordinary man employs 
his physical body, and through it survey vast fields of 
higher knowledge lying open to him. Yet every man will 
have had some touch of pure, unselfish feeling, even if it 
were but once in all his life, and that will be a window 
for him now. Every man, except the utter savage at a 
very early stage, will as surely have something of this 
wondrous life of bliss. Therefore as a matter of fact, 
instead of some men going to heaven and some to hell, 
most men have their share both of purgatory and heaven, 
and it is only their relative proportions which differ. 

To think a loving or noble thought, to appreciate a 
fine writer or a lovely work of art in the physical world, 
is to open a window into the heaven-world ; to make a habit 
of high, unselfish thought is to keep that window always 
wide open. But the condition of a man in the heaven- 
world is chiefly receptive, and his vision of anything 
outside his own shell of thought is of the most limited 
character ; he cannot build a new window along new lines 
of activity if he took no interest in these during his 
physical life. There are many directions which the higher 
thought may take, some of them personal, like affection 
to a person or devotion to a personal deity, and some 
impersonal. Among the latter are art, music and philoso- 
phy, and a man whose interest lay along any of these lines 
finds both measureless enjoyment and unlimited instruction 
waiting for him—that is, the amount of enjoyment and 
instruction is limited only by his power of perception. 
Like a labourer returning home with his earnings of the 


272 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


day, the man draws from Devachan as much as he has 
prepared himself to take by his efforts during earthly life. 

On this plane exists the infinite fulness of the Divine 
Mind, open in all its limitless affluence to every soul, just 
in proportion as that soul has qualified himself to receive. 
It is a world whose power of response to a man’s aspira- 
tions is limited only by his capacity to aspire. In the East 
it is said that each man brings his own cup, of which some 
are large and some small, but each cup, large or small, is 
filled to its utmost capacity ; the sea of bliss holds far more 
than enough for all. 

QO. Then has not every one the same kind of heaven, or 
the same intensity of bliss there ? 

Ans. The mental images (or thought-forms) of unselfish 
thoughts which had stayed like seeds in the mental body 
begin to manifest like trees in Devachan, so that when a 
man has formed many mental images through aspiration 
for knowledge or unselfish desire to help humanity, though 
those images had then looked like castles in the air in the 
physical world, they now materialise in the finer matter of 
the mental world, and the man sees himself doing there 
everything according to his desire. 

Mental matter being more subtle than physical 
matter, thoughts are things in the mental or heaven-world, 
and by the power of thought every one in heaven creates 
his own world according to his desires. As are a man’s 
thoughts, so is his Devachan, and the thoughts of no two 
persons being alike, their heavens also must differ accord- 
ingly. Still every one finding himself each moment exactly 
according to his desire, all are extremely happy though 
enjoying different degrees of bliss. 

Again, if the joys of heaven were of one particular 
type only, as the orthodox theory holds, there would 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 273 


always be some who would soon get weary owing to 
their inability to participate in those joys, through want 
of taste in that particular direction or from lack of 
necessary education. Thus one man’s heaven cannot 
be imposed on all, as a slum-child cannot be happy 
in the glorious surroundings of the artist, and what gives 
happiness to one may not give any happiness at all to 
another. As it is, each one creates his own heaven by his 
thought-forms, by selection from the ineffable splendours 
of the Thought of God Himself. He decides for himself 
both the length and the character of his heaven-life by the 
causes which he himself generates during his earth-life ; 
therefore he cannot but have exactly the amount which 
he has deserved, and exactly the quality of joy which is 
best suited to his idiosyncrasies. Thus this is the only 
imaginable arrangement which can make every one happy 
to the fullest extent of his capacity for happiness. 

Q. What happens to children in the heaven-world ? 

Ans. Of all those who enter that world, children are 
the happiest and the most entirely at home. They do not 
lose the parents, the brothers, the sisters or the playmates 
whom they love; it is simply that they have them to play 
with during what we call the night instead of the day ; so 
that they have no feeling of loss or separation. During 
our day they are never left alone, for, in that world as in 
this, children gather together and play together—play in 
Elysian fields full of rare delights and are always full of 
jey and often even riotously happy. 

Even those children whose thoughts turn more 
naturally to religious matters never fail to find that for 
which they long. For the angels and saints of old exist 
and are not mcre pious fancies ; and those who believe in 


them and need them are surely drawn to them and find 
85 


274 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


them more kindly and glorious than ever fancy dreamed. 
Yet even those who would find God Himself—God in 
material form—are not disappointed ; for from the gent- 
lest and the kindest teachers they learn that all forms are 
God’s forms, for He is everywhere, and those who would 
serve and help even the lowest of His creatures are truly 
serving and helping Him. As children like to be useful, 
a wide field for help and comfort lies before them in 
their errands of mercy and love among the ignorant in 
that higher world. 

We should have no fear for the tiny babies who are 
as yet too young to play; for many a dead mother waits 
eagerly to clasp them to her breast, to receive and love 
them as though they were her own. Usually such little 
ones rest in the spiritual world but a short time, as stated 
before, and return to earth once more, often to the very 
same father and mother. 

Q. How do we find our friends and dear ones in the 
heaven-world ? 

Ans. If a man loves another with deep unselfish love, 
he makes a strong thought-form or mental image of that 
friend or relative, and naturally takes that image to the 
heaven-world with him, as it is to that level of matter that 
such love belongs in virtue of its unselfishness. The force 
of such love is strong enough to act on the ego of the 
friend in the higher part of the mental body, because it is 
the ego or the soul that a man loves in unselfish love, not 
the physical body. Now the ego of the friend feeling this 
vibration at once makes a response and pours himself into 
the thought-form created by the Devachani. So the man’s 
friend is truly present with him very vividly, and it does 
not matter whether that friend be living or dead; for the 
appeal is made, not to the fragment of the friend which is 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 275 


sometimes imprisoned in a physical body, but to the ego 
who can thus simultaneously respond to the affection of 
even a hundred friends, as no number of representations 
on a lower level can exhaust the fulness of the ego, any 
more than any number of lines can make a square, or any 
number of squares a cube. 

Thus every man in the heaven-world will always 
have around him all the friends and relatives he wishes to 
have, and they are with him always at their best, as they 
are then two stages nearer the reality than in the limita- 
tions of the physical world. 

The same remarks hold good if a man was inspired 
by devotion to a personal deity. The deity is always 
present with the dead man even more vividly than on the 
physical plane. 

Q. But does a dead man in heaven watt for and watch 
his friends and dear ones on earth below ? 

Ans. No. Howcould the dead man be happy in heaven 
if he looked back and saw his dear ones in sorrow or in 
the commission of sin, say, his wife grieving for his loss, 
or, worse still, marrying another shortly afterwards ? 

The case of waiting is scarcely better, for then he 
will have a long wearisome period of waiting, often ex- 
tending to years, while again the friend may arrive so very 
much changed as to be no longer sympathetic. But 
according to the arrangement provided by nature, these 
difficulties are all avoided, and those whom the man loved 
are ever with him and always at their noblest and best, 
while no discord or change can come between them since 
he receives from them all the time exactly what he wishes. 

Q. If a soul spends so much of his time in Devachan 
between two incarnations, what are his opportunities of 
development during that stay ? 


276 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Ans. 1. Through qualities in himself he has opened 
corresponding windows in the heaven-world, and by 
continued exercise of those qualities for a long time he 
will greatly strengthen them and return to earth richly 
dowered in that respect. Thoughts being intensified by 
reiteration, a man spending hundreds of years in pouring 
out unselfish affection will certainly know how to love 
strongly and well. Devachan is a life of assimilation, and 
the thought-forms of aspirations or of mental and moral 
experiences gathered on earth are worked in the texture 
of the soul as mental and moral faculties, and become the 
powers and qualities, capacities and tendencies, for his 
next life on earth. 

2. Through his aspirations he will come into 
contact with some of the great orders of spirits and learn 
much from them. For example, he may learn marvellous 
new combinations in music from the Gandharvas— 
a great order of Angels who are especially devoted to 
music. 

3. He will gain additional information and 
instruction through the mental images made of others, if 
these people themselves are sufficiently developed to be 
able to teach him. One having a strong image of the 
Master will thus get definite teaching and help through tt. 

Q. Are there seven different heavens as ts ordinarily 
believed, and does a man pass through all these successively 
as in the case of the astral plane ? 

Ans. As explained in Chapter II there are seven sub- 
divisions in the mental as in the astral world. The three 
highest, the Arupa Loka or Formless levels, are the 
habitat of the ego in the causal body, while the four lower 
ones, the Rupa Loka, form the heaven where the man 
passes his heaven-life in the mental body. 


LIFE AFTER DEATH 277 


There being nothing in the mental body corre- 
sponding to the redistribution of the astral matter, a man 
does not pass through the successive stages or regions of 
the heaven-world one after another as is done in the 
astral world, but is drawn to the level which corresponds 
most closely to the degree of his development, and spends 
his whole life there in the mental body. 

The dominant characteristic of the lowest or seventh 
subdivision 1s unselfish family affection, all selfish tinges 
being required to be worked out on the astral plane. The 
sixth has the characteristic of anthropomorphic religious 
devotion, while the fifth has that of devotion expressing 
itself in work of some sort. All the above three subdivisions 
are concerned with the working of devotion to personalities, 
either to family, friend or personal deity. 

The fourth section has for its dominant note the 
wider devotion to humanity, which includes activities 
connected with unselfish pursuit of spiritual knowledge, 
high philosophy or scientific thought, unselfish literary or 
artistic ability, and service for the love of service. 

At the end of the heaven-life, which lasts for 
different periods as explained in Chapter IV, the mental 
body in its turn drops away as the others have done, 
and the man’s life in the causal body begins. 

Q. What happens to the man in the higher heaven—the 
three higher subplanes of the mental world—in his catsal 
body at the end of his heaven-life in the lower mental 
world ? 

Ans. All the mental faculties which express themselves 
on the lower levels are drawn into the causal body with 
all the germs of passional life which were drawn into the 
mental body from the astral at the time of leaving the 
astral shell, and the Thinker having finished a round of 


278 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


his pilgrimage dwells for a time in his own native land. 
Here the soul needs no windows as all the walls have fallen 
away; but the majority of men, having only a dim con- 
sciousness of their surroundings at this height, rest there 
for a short time, scarcely awake, yet assimilating the 
small results of the closed earth-life. Still, with develop- 
ment, the life of the man on the formless level becomes 
longer, richer and deeper as his causal body grows bigger 
and better organised, and he returns to earth-life with 
greater knowledge and more effective power to help him- 
self and others. 

On the highest subplane live the Masters or Adepts 
and Their higher pupils; on that next below, the souls 
whose higher evolution is attested by their inborn culture 
and natural refinement when in earthly bodies; and on 
the third subplane, the vast majority of the sixty thousand 
millions of souls, spoken of before, who form the mass of 
our as yet backward humanity. 

The length of a man’s stay in the higher mental 
world depends on the stage of his evolution as well as on 
his deep thinking and noble living during earth-life, as 
described in Chapter IV. 

Still, to every man, however unprogressed, there 
comes a moment of clear vision before his return to earth, 
when he sees his past life with the causes working from it 
into the future, and, glancing forward, he also sees the 
next incarnation that awaits him with its possibilities and 
opportunities. Then the clouds of matter close upon him 
and obscure his vision, and the cycle of another incarna- 
tion begins with the awakening of the powers of the lower 
mind through Tanha, the blind thirst for manifested life, 
as already explained in Chapter IV on Reincarnation. 


CHAPTER VII 
THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 


Question. Whatis thought and how does it show itself ? 

Answer. Thought is a change in consciousness corre- 
sponding to a mode of motion in the matter of the mental 
plane. There is Manas, the Thinker, who thinks or knows, 
and the mind is merely his instrument for obtaining know- 
ledge, an organ of consciousness in its aspect as knower. 
We see objects when the light-ether is thrown into waves 
between those objects and our eye; when we think of an 
object, the thought-ether, #.e., the matter of the mental 
plane, is thrown into waves between that object and our 
mind. Not only do we create these waves, but the waves 
of thoughts created by others also impinge on our mental 
body and modify the arrangement of its materials, and in 
concrete thinking we experience over again the impacts of 
the original thought-waves. 

We have seen in Chapter III that man possesses a 
vehicle corresponding to each of the interpenetrating worlds 
of our solar system, that his astral body is the vehicle of 
his desires, passions and emotions, and that similarly his 
mental body is the vehicle for the expression of his 
thought. It is in the matter of the mental body that 
thought first shows itself as a vibration to clairvoyant 
Sight—a vibration which produces various effects as 


280 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


definite in their action upon the fine type of matter as Is 
the power of steam or electricity over physical matter. 

Only a few rich men can have steam or electrical 
power to do useful work, but every human being, rich or 
poor, young or old, has at his disposal a considerable pro- 
portion of the forces of the finer types of matter which 
respond to the influences of human thought and emotion. 
This power, though possessed by all, is intelligently used so 
far only by few. Possession brings responsibility with it, 
but most men are wrongly using this power through igno- 
rance, and instead of thoroughly utilising these magnificent 
possibilities are unintentionally doing harm both to them- 
selves and to others. 

Q. What have the Scriptures of the different world- 
religions to say on the subject ? 

Ans. ‘Thoughts alone cause the round of births,” 
says a Hindu Scripture, “let a man strive to purify his 
thoughts ; what a man thinks on, that he becomes.” ‘“ As 
he thinketh in his heart, so is he,” says the wise KIng of 
Israel. ‘‘ All that we are is made up of our thoughts,” 
declared the Buddha. Purity (of thoughts, words and 
deeds) is the key-word of the Zoroastrian religion ; 
“ Purity,” it says, ‘is the greatest bliss,” the purity of 
words and deeds being evidently dependent on that of 
thought. ‘‘ Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after 
her, hath committed adultery with her already in his 
heart,” said the Christ. And again: ‘“ He who hateth his 
brother, ¢s a murderer.” 

Thought is real in two senses, directly and indirect- 
ly. Everybody recognises the indirect action of thought, 
for it is obvious that a man must think before he can do 
anything, and thought is the motive power of the act just 
as water is the motive power of the mill. But people 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 281 


generally do not know that thought has also a direct action 
on matter, and that whether or not a man translates his 
thought into deed or word, the thought has already pro- 
duced its effect. Again, thought being the parent of action, 
a man can mould his character and therefore his destiny 
by the exercise of this power. 

Q. What then are the effects of thought ? 

Ans. They can be broadly divided into two groups, the 
effects produced upon the man himself, and those pro- 
duced outside of the man. 

The effects upon the man himself are: First, the 
effect upon the mental body itself, z.e., a habit of readily 
repeating a particular thought, and secondly, the effects 
produced on the other two vehicles, the astral and causal 
bodies, which are below and above the mental body re- 
spectively, in degree of density, t.e., the effect upon his 
emotions temporarily and the building up of qualities in 
the ego permanently. 

The effects outside of him are the production of a 
radiating vibration and a floating form. 

Q. Please describe in detail, first, the effects upon the 
man himself. 

Ans. The effect on the mental body of the man is that 
it sets up a habit because the thought tends to repeat 
itself. Though there are different types of matter in the 
mental body, each with its own special rate of vibration to 
which it readily responds, a strong thought sets the matter 
of the whole body swinging at the same rate, and if a man 
accustoms his mental body to a certain rate of vibration, 
that body learns to reproduce it easily and forms a habit of 
readily repeating that particular thought. Again, a mind 
tenanted by certain thoughts acts as a magnet to attract 


like thoughts from others and intensifies the original effect. 
36 


282 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


For example, by thinking even one noble thought a man 
sets up an attractive centre to which other noble thoughts 
will come of their own accord drawn by magnetic affinity, 
and his mind will be helped and strengthened by these 
thoughts flowing in from without, and so he gains more 
than what he gives. 

Secondly, there are the effects upon the astral and 
causal bodies. The disturbance in one type of physical 
matter 1s communicated to another type, denser or finer ; 
for example, the wind disturbs the surface of the sea, and 
the earthquake produces a mighty wave in the ocean. 
Similarly, a disturbance in the gross matter of the astral 
body, 7.¢., an emotion, may cause undulations in the finer 
matter of the mental body, z.e., a thought corresponding 
to the emotion ; and conversely, a movement in the mental 
body may affect the coarser matter of the astral, a thought 
provoking an emotion. Thus aman may, by brooding 
over what he considers his wrong, easily lash himself into 
anger, though by thinking calm thoughts he can prevent 
that anger. 

Again, the mental body will also act upon the finer 
causal body, whereby the habitual thought builds up 
qualities in the ego himself. Thought builds character 
as already explained in Chapter V on Karma. The 
qualities forming the character of the personality, z.e., the 
character which is moulded in each of his personalities in 
turn by training and surrounding circumstances and which 
shows itself in the mind body, are absorbed in the causal 
body and become the persisting character of the individual ; 
and the man returns to earth with these qualities as his 
stock-in-trade for the new life. 

Thus looking at the effects on the man himself we 
see that in the first place thought tends to repeat itself and 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 283 


forms a habit, and that in the second place it acts not only 
on his emotions temporarily, but also permanently upon 
his character, upon the man himself. One more effect 
upon the man of his self-centred thoughts we shall see 
presently under Thought-forms. 

Q. Of the two effects of thought external to the man, 
please describe the first, 1.¢., the radiating vibration. 

Ans. The thought itself appears first to clairvoyant 
sight as a vibration in the mental body and may be 
either simple or complex. If it be purely intellectual by 
the man thinking over a philosophical question or 
solving a mathematical problem, the resulting vibration 
will be confined to the mental world; if the thought be 
of a spiritual nature, if it be tinged with love, aspiration 
or unselfish feeling, it will rise to the realm of the 
higher mental or even upwards into the Buddhic plane, 
and may be glorious and exceedingly powerful. But the 
majority of human thoughts are by no means simple. 
Absolutely pure affection exists, but very often we find 
it tinged with pride or selfishness, with jealousy or animal 
passions ; and thus when a thought is tinged with personal 
desires, its vibrations draw downward with most of their 
force spent in the astral world. There being thus at 
least two separate vibrations both in the mental and astral 
bodies, the radiating vibration will be a complex one, 
while the thought-form will show several colours instead 
of only one. 

Thus the first effect of thought, outside of the man, 
is a radiating vibration—simple or complex, according to 
the nature of the thought—in the sea of mental matter 
alone or in both the mental and the astral, like that pro- 
duced by a stone thrown into a pond. These undulations, 
acting upon their respective levels like vibrations of light 


284 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


or sound in the physical world, radiate out in all directions, 
becoming less powerful as they go farther away from 
their. source. The thought-radiations affect not only 
the sea of the surrounding mental matter, but also other 
mental bodies moving in it. The vibrations of a note 
struck on a piano are carried through the air and set 
the corresponding note sounding on another piano tuned 
exactly to the same pitch. Similarly, a thought-vibration 
in a mental body being conveyed through mental matter 
tends to reproduce itself in another mental body, 2.e., 
produces in the other mental body thought of the same 
type as that in the mind of the thinker who sent forth the 
vibration; in other words, thought may be said to be 
‘infectious ’. 

The strength of the radiation is poured out chiefly 
upon one of the four levels of the lower mental world ; 
but a man’s thoughts, being centred mostly round himself, 
are undulations of the lowest subdivision of the mental 
world, while owing to his mental body being’ still 
undeveloped, the higher portions of that body are yet 
quite dormant. 

The distance covered by such a wave and the force 
and persistence with which it impinges upon the mental 
bodies of others depend on the strength and clearness of 
the original thought, the thinker being in the same 
position as a speaker who sets in motion waves of sound 
in air radiating in all directions and carrying his message, 
the distance to which his voice can penetrate depending 
upon the strength and clearness of its enunciation. Thus 
a strong thought will carry much farther than a weak or 
undecided one, but clearness and distinctness are of 
more importance even than strength. Again, like a voice 
falling upon heedless ears a strong wave of thought may 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 285 


sweep past without affecting the mind of a man already 
engaged in some other line of thought. 

This radiating vibration conveys the character of 
the thought, but not its subject, and is extremely adaptable. 
It may reproduce itself exactly if it finds a subject readily 
responding to it in every way, otherwise it produces a 
decided effect upon lines broadly similar to its own. 
The devotional vibrations rippling out from a Hindu 
sitting rapt in devotion to Shri Krishna, striking upon the 
mental or astral body of another Vaishnavite will arouse, 
in the latter, thought and feeling identical with the 
original, but the same vibrations striking upon a 
Muhammadan or a Christian may arouse in him the 
sentiment of devotion to Allah or to Christ (or the 
Blessed Virgin) respectively, and even touching the 
mental body of a materialist without any idea of devotion 
would still produce an elevating effect by stirring the 
higher part of his mental body into some sort of activity, 
though they cannot create a type of vibration to which 
the man js totally unaccustomed. Thus a man thinking 
along high lines is doing missionary work though he may 
be entirely unconscious of it. 

On the contrary, a man thinking of another with 
hatred or malice radiates a wave tending to provoke 
similar passions in others; and though his feeling of 
hatred be for someone quite unknown to those others, 
making it impossible that they should share it, yet the 
radiation will stir in them an emotion of the same nature 
to a totally different man. They may, thereby, even 
commit a murder in the heat of passion, but the first man 
who radiates the wave, lending strength to the murderous 
blow, will have to share the karma of the murder as one 
of the originators of that passion. 


286 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Q. What does an ordinary man’s astral body with his 
passtons and desires look like when seen by clairvoyant 
sight ? 

Ans. The average astral body—of not a specially bad, 
impulsive or passionate man, but just the ordinary average 
man—when looked at clairvoyantly, is seen to be one 
whole swirling mass. Instead of certain striations with 
colours clearly marked and circulating as they should do 
on the surface of his astra] body, there are seen fifty or 
sixty little vortices or whirlpools in violent circulation, 
each of which makes a hard knot, like a wart on the 
physical body, owing to the rapidity of its motion. 
These things stud the man’s astral body all over and make 
it impossible for him to think with the clearness and 
definiteness which he could command if he got all that 
into order. Because of these little whirls going on all the 
time, most men’s thoughts are never entirely clear, while 
their emotions are neither definite nor one-pointed. 

On being analysed, these whirls are all found to 
have originated either in some little outburst of temper, or 
little worries, or little feelings of offence, jealousy, envy, 
perhaps even of hatred, which the man has had some time 
within the last forty-eight hours, because such things 
persist at least that length of time. If the man should 
renew the same kind of thought about the same person, 
he will make a much larger vortex, which will last much 
longer. If, however, he thinks one angry thought about a 
person, it will set up one of those disturbances in the 
matter of his astral body which will last about a couple of 
days, even though he may forget within ten minutes that 
he had the transitory feeling of annoyance or may believe 
the effect to have completely disappeared. These vortices 
gradually subside, but their places are taken by others; 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 287 


and nine out of ten men, just the ordinary men in the street, 
unconsciously contrive to keep their stock of these vortices 
pretty well at the same level, and are always dotted over 
with these ugly-looking warts which utterly warp them 
from thinking or feeling as they otherwise would. 

All these whirls, from the viewpoint of psychic force, 
are like open sores through which the will-power of the 
man is leaking out all the time; and the first thing for a 
man who wants to conserve his energies and do good work 
with them is to check all these sources of waste and keep 
his astral and mental bodies perfectly calm by control of 
temper and by avoiding all petty worries and undesirable 
little feelings and thoughts. 

Q. Now what is the second effect of thought outside of 
the man ? 

Ans. The second effect of thought external to the man 
is the creation of a definite, floating thought-form. 

The mental and astral bodies are chiefly concerned 
with the appearance of thought-forms. Every thought 
produces correlated vibrations in the matter of the mental 
body, accompanied by a marvellous play of colour, and 
the body under this impulse throws off a vibrating portion 
of itself, shaped by the nature of the vibrations, This 
portion gathers round itself similar matter from the mental 
elemental essence which surrounds us in all directions, 
producing a thought-form of only one colour if the 
thought is a simple one. But when the man’s energy flows 
outwards towards external objects of desire or is occupied 
in passional or emotional activities, this energy works, not 
in the mental matter, but in the grosser matter of the astral 
or desire body. Thus when a man’s passions are excited, 
or:a wave of emotion sweeps over him, his astral body is 
thrown into violent agitation with various characteristic 


288 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


colours flashing through it. The astra] body then gives 
rise to a second class of entities, similar in constitution to 
the simple thought-form, but limited to the astral plane, 
and caused by the activity of Kama-Manas or the mind 
dominated by desire. This body when vibrating throws 
off a portion of itself, shaped as before by the nature of 
the vibrations, and this attracts to itself some of the 
elemental essence of the astral world. Such a thought- 
form has for its body this elemental essence and for its 
soul the desire or passion which threw it forth, while its 
force will be proportionate to the amount of mental energy 
combined with the desire or passion. Thought-forms of 
this second kind are by far the most common, as few 
thoughts of ordinary persons are untinged with desire, 
passion or emotion. 

The elemental essence, spoken of in connection with 
the Second Life-Wave in Chapter VIII, that strange half- 
intelligent life which surrounds us in all directions, is not 
differentiated into stable or persistent forms. The matter 
of the astral and mental worlds, irrespective of a soul who 
makes a vehicle out of it, is alive with this elemental essence 
—a peculiar kind of life, which is delicately sensitive, quick 
with life, and is not individualised. The effect produced 
on the particles of water in a cup as an electric current is 
passed through it may give a faint idea of the vitality and 
energy of mental and astral grades of matter as elemental 
essence of the first and second and third types affects and 
vivifies them. This vivified matter is, as it were, in a 
‘critical state,’ ready to precipitate into thought-forms 
the moment a vibration of thought from a thinker’s mind 
affects it. It thus responds readily to the influence of 
human thoughts and feelings, every thought or impulse 
clothing itself in a temporary vehicle of this vitalised 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 289 


matter. Such a thought or impulse becomes for the time 
a living creature, the thought-force being the soul and the 
vivified matter the body, and is spoken of as a thought- 
form or an artificial elemental. A thought-form is a 
living entity with a strong tendency to carry out the inten- 
tion of the thinker, but is neither self-conscious nor capable 
of experiencing pleasure or pain. There is an infinite 
variety in the colour and shape of such thought-forms, for 
each thought draws round it the matter which is appro- 
priate for its expression, and sets that matter into vibration 
in harmony with its own. According to the type and 
quality of the thought is the thought-form made out of 
mental or astral elemental essence. These thought-forms 
are fleeting, or lasting for hours, months or years ; and 
hence they are classed among the inhabitants of the in- 
visible worlds under the name of ‘ elementals’. There are 
four general principles underlying the production of all 
thought-forms : 
1. Quality or character of thought determines 
colour. 
2. Nature of thought determines form. 
3. Definiteness of thought determines precision 
or clearness of outline. 
4. Steadiness and strength of thought determine 
duration and size. 

The colours indicate the character of the thought, 
and are in agreement with those which have been already 
described in Chapter III as existing in the bodies. 

The work of a thought-form is much more limited 
but much more precise than that of the radiating undula- 
tion. The form cannot reach so many persons—indeed it 
cannot act upon a person at all unless he has in him some- 
thing harmonious with the energy ensouling that form ; 

37 


290 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


but when it does act, it produces in the mind-body which 
it influences, not merely a thought of a similar nature, but 
actually the same thought. A radiation may affect 
thousands and stir up in them thoughts on the same level 
as the original, yet none may happen to be identical with 
the original thought; but a thought-form, though it can 
affect only one or a few, reproduces exactly the initiatory 
idea. 

Q. Please make the matter clearer by some sort of 
classification of thought-forms ? 

Ans. All thought-forms may be divided into three 
groups. 

I. Those which take the image of the thinker. 
When a man thinks of himself as in some distant place, or 
wishes earnestly to be in that place, he makes a thought- 
form in his own image which appears there, and which, 
being sometimes seen by others, is taken for the astral 
body of the man. 

II. Those which take the image of some material 
object. When a man thinks of a friend, a room, a land- 
scape, or a book, he forms within his mental body a tiny 
image of that friend or of any of the things thought of. 
This image floats in the upper part of that body, usually 
in front of the face of the man, and at about the level of 
his eyes. It remains there as long as the man is contem- 
plating that object and usually for a little time afterwards, 
before it is externalised or passes out, the length of time 
depending upon the intensity and the clearness of the 
thought. 

III. Those which take a form entirely their own, 
expressing their inherent qualities in the matter which they 
draw round them. To represent thought-forms of the 
first or second group would be merely to draw portraits or 





THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 291 


landscapes, as in those types we have the plastic mental or 
astral matter moulded in imitation of forms belonging 
to the physical plane, but in this third group we have 
a glimpse of the forms natural to the astral or mental 
planes. We are concerned here simply with the last 
group which may be subdivided into three classes : 

1. Thoughts definitely directed towards another 
person or persons. 

2. Thoughts not directed to others, but con- 
nected chiefly with the thinker, 2.c., self- 
centred thoughts. 

3. Thoughts neither aimed specially at any 
person nor centred round the thinker. 

Thought-forms of the above three classes of the 
third group mainly manifest themselves upon the astral 
plane, as most of them are expressions of feeling as well as 
of thought. The vibration of a thought with something 
of persona] desire turns downwards and draws round itself 
a body of astral matter in addition to its clothing of 
mental matter, and the resultant thought-form can act 
upon the astral bodies of men as well as upon their minds ; 
and so it can not only raise thought within them but can 
also produce emotions. 

1. Thoughts aimed at others: 

Suppose a man sends a thought of affection or devo- 
tion, of envy or hatred ; that thought will, like any other, 
produce a radiating vibration which will affect all within its 
sphere of influence ; but the thought-form thus created has 
a definite intention, and so as soon as it breaks away from 
the mental and astral bodies of the thinker, it goes straight 
to the person thought of and fastens itself upon his aura 
It is a kind of Leyden jar existing for the sole purpose of 
discharging itself and seizes the first opportunity of doing 


292 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


so. The astral and mental elemental essence forms the 
jar, while the energy of the thought corresponds to the 
charge of electricity. If the man to whom it is directed 
is in a passive condition or is thinking along a line similar 
to the nature of the thought-form, it will at once discharge 
itself, provoking or intensifying an undulation similar to 
its own ; but if he be actively engaged in some other work, 
the thought-form hovers around him and waits for a suit- 
able opportunity to discharge itself. 

But a thought, good or evil, in order to fulfil its 
mission, must find, in the aura of the object to whom it is 
sent, materials capable of responding sympathetically to 
its vibrations, otherwise it cannot affect that aura at all, 
but rebounds from it with a force proportionate to the 
energy with which it impinged on that aura. Conse- 
quently, an evil thought projected at a holy person re- 
bounds from his body, and being flung back with its 
own energy flies backward along the magnetic line of least 
resistance and strikes its projector who has within his 
astral and mental bodies matter similar to that of the 
thought-form. Thus “curses (as well as blessings) come 
home to roost ”’. 

A thought full of intensity, say of a pure desire full 
of love or benevolence, will build a form of exquisite beauty, 
both in shape and colour, while a thought of anger, hatred, 
revenge or any other evil passion, will build up a form 
hideous in its deformity, which is the very devil of evil 
filled with the desire to injure and destroy. A mother’s 
love produces a beautiful thought-form full of tenderness, 
hovering round the children as a shielding and protecting 
agent, seeking all opportunies to serve and defend, cheer- 
ing them in sorrow and, like a veritable guardian angel, 
warning and protecting them in danger or temptation. 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE #93 


2. Self-centred thoughts : a 

A thought aimed at some other man fies like a 
missile towards him, but if it be connected with the 
thinker himself, it remains floating near its creator, ready 
to react upon him and to stir in his mind the same 
thought once more whenever he is for a moment ina 
passive condition. The majority of thoughts and feelings 
of an ordinary man are self-centred, and so their forms 
remain clustering round him. Usually each definite 
thought creates a new thought-form; but if a thought- 
form of the same nature is already hovering round 
the thinker, under certain circumstances, a new thought 
on the same subject, instead of creating a new form, 
coalesces with and strengthens the old one, so that by long 
brooding over the same subject a man may sometimes 
create a thought-form of tremendous power. Thus every 
man has built for himself a shell of thought-forms, verl- 
table garments, both of feelings and of thoughts, and the 
man travels through space always surrounded by a host of 
such forms and enclosed within a cage of his own building. 
So long as his mind is occupied with other thoughts, these 
forms hover round him and bide their time ; but when the 
train of his thoughts is exhausted or his mind lies fallow 
Or passive, he being the nearest to those forms is reacted 
upon by them at the first opportunity, and, feeling the 
pressure of his evil thoughts as of a suggestion from out- 
side, believes himself to be tempted by the devil. Thus a 
man habitually thinking of dishonesty or coveting another's 
goods may commit theft in a weak moment. 

On the contrary, a man with habitual thoughts of 
purity may, by the pressure of his thought-forms, be able 
to do good things which, being much above his normal 
power, seem to him to have been done with the help of 


294 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


angels, though both the above instances are merely cases of 
natural reactions of the respective men’s habitual feelings 
and thoughts. 

3. Thoughts neither self-centred nor directed 

specially to any person: 

A thought-form generated by this class of thought 
neither hovers round the person, following him wherever 
he goes, nor shoots straight away from him, aiming at a 
definite objective, but simply remains idly floating in the 
atmosphere where it was created, radiating vibrations 
similar to those originally sent forth by its creator. If it 
does not come into contact with any other mental body, its 
stock of energy is gradually exhausted by the radiation, and 
the form falls to pieces. But if that thought-form succeeds 
in awakening sympathetic vibrations in any mental body 
near by, it is attracted to and usually absorbed by 
that mental body. An ordinary man thinks numerous 
thoughts of this class and leaves them behind him asa 
sort of trail which marks the route of their creator. 

The whole atmosphere is thus filled with vague 
thoughts of this last type, and walking along and, as it 
were, picking our way through these vague, wandering 
fragments of other people’s thoughts, our minds are serious- 
ly affected by them if not definitely occupied. Sweeping 
through a mind lying idle the majority of such forms do not 
arouse any special interest, though occasionally comes one 
which attracts attention, and the mind, fastening upon it, 
entertains it for a moment or two and dismisses it a little 
stronger than it was on its arrival. Not one-fourth of our 
thoughts are our own, but are simply fragments picked up 
from the atmosphere, in most cases valueless and with a 
general tendency distinctly more towards evil than towards 
good. 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 295 


Every ordinary man is producing these three classes 
of thought-forms all through his life. 

We are peopling our atmosphere either with angels 
of beauty and virtue or with hideous devils of ugliness and 
vice, purifying or befouling the minds of our generation, 
and if ever we could see them, the sight would make us 
pause and be always careful to discard all evil 6r impure 
thoughts. Thus we can no longer say that at least our 
thoughts are our own, or that while we should certainly 
be careful about our words and actions, it does not matter 
at all what our thoughts are. As a matter of fact our 
thoughts are less our own than our words or actions, for 
the former travel to a far greater distance from us than 
the latter two, and their influence working directly on the 
minds of others is stronger and far more widely spread. 

Such is the power or action of thought on our- 
selves and on others. We not only affect ourselves 
strongly by forming our habits and character in the 
astral and mental bodies and building permanent qualities 
in the causal body, but we also influence others for good 
or for evil by the radiating vibrations and the thought- 
forms of various kinds. 

Q. The action or effect of thought is now understood, 
but how should we use this knowledge ? 

Ans. There are two main uses: 

1. We can forward our own evolution. 
2. Wecan help our fellow-men. 

Q. How can we forward our own evolution through 
a knowledge of the power of thought ? 

Ans. Since every thought or emotion produces a per- 
manent effect by strengthening or weakening a tendency, 
and since, furthermore, every thought-vibration and 
thought-form must inevitably react upon the thinker, we 


2% THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


must exercise great control and care as to the thought or 
impulse we allow within ourselves. An ordinary man 
allows himself to yield to all kinds of emotions and 
thoughts, but by a scientific study of the action of these 
forces as explained above, he would realise that it is his 
interest as well as his duty to have all his emotions and 
thoughts absolutely under control. The stage of evolution 
at which we have arrived is the development of the mental 
body, and a man, recognising that the mind is not the man 
but an instrument for his use, should assist that develop- 
ment by not allowing the mind to indulge in its vagaries 
and by endeavouring to assert control over it. 

We should therefore forward our evolution, first, by 
keeping our mind and emotions under control and thereby 
building our character, and secondly, by not foolishly 
wasting our energy which can be utilised for better work 
and higher purposes. 

Q. What should we do to keep our mind and emotions 
under control, and avoid evil, idle or tseless thoughts 
which trouble the mind ? 

Ans. Instead of allowing every surging or upwelling of 
emotions to sway us, we must learn to keep them under 
control by the mind. The reins of mind in the hands of 
the driver, or the real man, must be able to control and 
guide the horses of desires drawing the chariot of the 
physical body. 

The first step to control the mind is to keep it use- 
fully occupied. It must not be allowed to remain idle, as 
thereby any passing thought-form may drift into it, and 
while lying fallow it is more likely to take up evil im- 
pressions than good ones. The best way is to keep at the 
back of our mind some high thought or some inspiration 
to noble living. The mind can only occupy itself with 


298 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


our ability. Thus in writing a letter we should write it 
well and accurately without carelessness in detail ; in read- 
ing a book we should read it with attention, trying to grasp 
the author’s meaning. 

Again, a person training his mind should maintain 
an attitude of watchfulness regarding the thoughts coming 
into the mind and should exercise a constant selection. 
The practice of refusing to harbour evil thoughts, their 
prompt ejection when they effect an entry, and the re- 
placement of an evil thought by one of good character, 
will so tune the mind that it will act automatically, repel- 
ling the evil and attracting the good. 

Q. Now how to build character with the knowledge of 
the power of thought ? 

Ans. This is the third method of concentration, recom- 
mended above for a non-devotional man, and has been 
already described in Chapter IV on Karma as one of the 
threads of the cord of fate. It may again be described 
here in brief. 

Examining his character a man should pick out 
some distinct defect, say, irritability. But he should not 
forget that, as thought builds, fixing thought on irritabi- 
lity would make it more permanent instead of getting rid 
of it. He should always take, as the object of his thought, 
the opposite of any weakness in him; e.g., to remove 
inaccuracy, he should meditate on the exactly opposite 
virtue of truth. Thus taking the virtue which is the 
exact opposite of the weakness of irritability, namely 
patience, he should, in the early morning before going out 
into the world, sit in retirement in a quiet place for five 
minutes, and think and meditate on patience, its value, its 
beauty, its practice under provocation, etc., and write, as 
it were, a mental essay on patience, recalling the mind 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 299 


when it wanders away and bringing it back again and 
again from various side-issues it might have wandered 
into. He should think of himself as a model of patience 
with a vow that he would feel and practise that virtue 
that day in practical life. For a few days there may not 
be any perceptible change, and though he may still show 
irritability, he should go on meditating every morning. 
Then as he says an irritating thing, a thought will flash 
into his mind that he ought to have been patient. Still 
going on, the thought of patience will arise with the 
irritable impulse and the outer manifestation will be 
checked. With a little more practice the irritable impulse 
will grow feebler; and irritability disappearing, patience 
will become the normal attitude. Thus one virtue after 
another can be taken and an ideal character created by 
the power of thought, until passions, appetites and lower 
nature are dominated and thoroughly brought under control. 

Of course a large number of people in the world 
are in the habit of taking the character of which they are 
possessed as a sort of inalienable something which is given 
to them, like a lame leg. If aman has a bad temper or a 
weak will, or finds himself full of desires for the grosser 
things, he says: ‘‘ That is how I am made; it is my 
nature.” He does not realise that he made himself by 
his past lives and that therefore, taking hold of any weak- 
ness, he can change it by his present exertion. But he 
does not know that he can change a nature which ts 
undesirable, and, furthermore, he does not see particularly 
why he should. It is no easy matter for a man to change 
his character which is the very fundamental basis of him. 
Perhaps there is no sufficient inducement or adequate 
reason held out to the average man as to why he should 
take all that trouble. But if he understands God’s Plan, 


300 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


if, because God is Love, he learns to love God and to seek 
to co-operate with Him, then he has the most tremendous 
of all possible motives for making himself fit to co-operate 
in the great work of evolution. Again, with a knowledge 
of reincarnation, he knows that his present life is not the 
only life, but that he has all the lives he needs, that the 
point at which he leaves off in one life is the point where 
he takes up his work of improving his character in the 
next life, that the interval, however great, which may elapse 
between the end of one life and the beginning of the next, 
does not in the least degree interfere with the unity of the 
life-process, and that therefore he can change himself, 
make the most fundamental changes in his character and 
disposition. Thus it is only the higher knowledge which 
Theosophy gives that supplies a really sufficient incentive 
to any serious change of character. 

Q. What, then, should we do to avoid wasting our 
energy ? 

Ans. Each man has a certain amount of energy and 
he is responsible for its use in the best possible way, but 
an ordinary man foolishly wastes his force. He is simply 
a centre of agitated vibration; he is constantly in a con- 
dition of worry or deep depression or is unduly excited 
about some trifle, communicating, though unconsciously, 
his vibrations of unrest to all others who may be unfor- 
tunate enough to be around him. 

Another common way of wasting energy is by 
unnecessary argument on matters of politics or religion, 
or on incidents of ordinary life. A wise man does not try 
to enforce his opinion on others, and, knowing that what 
another believes is no business of his, simply declines to 
waste his time and energy in unprofitable wrangling, though 
he is quite willing to give information when asked. 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 30r 


People age more by worry than by work. Worry 
is the process of repeating the same train of thought over 
and over again with little alteration, without coming 
to any result. Many thus fritter away their energy in 
forecasting evil for themselves and their loved ones, with 
the fear of death or financial ruin. But they need not try 
to cross a bridge before they actually come to it and should 
also know that the world is governed by absolute justice, 
that none can wrong them save as an instrument of the Law 
and that nothing which they have not deserved by their past 
karma can ever come to them, and should therefore learn 
to train the mind to rest on the Good Law and establish a 
habit of content. 

Again, a wise man declines to take offence at the 
statement or action of another or to let his serenity be 
disturbed thereby, as he knows that an irritating remark, 
even when intentionally spiteful, can in no way harm him 
except in so far as he foolishly allows himself to be 
wounded in his feelings and thus to lose control over his 
vehicles. 


“ Am I to set my life upon a throw, 
Because a bear is rude or surly ? No. 

A modest, sensible and well-behaved man 
Will not insult me, and no other can.”’ 


Q. Is aquickening of our own evolutton the only advan- 
tage of controlling our mind and emotions and of 
husbanding our energy ? 

Ans. In addition to forwarding his own evolution, a 
man thereby makes himself useful to his fellow-men, 
avoids doing harm to them and learns how to do them 
good. For e::ample, if he allows himself to be angry, he 
not only sets up an evil habit and injures himself, but by 
radiating vibrations of anger seriously acts upon those 


302 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


who may be trying to control their irritability, though he 
may not be thinking of them at all. 

Every time he sends out a wave of anger, he tends 
to arouse a similar vibration in another if it did not pre- 
viously exist in that latter, or to intensify it if it be already 
present. 

Thus he makes his brother's work of self-develop- 
ment harder for him, though simply by controlling his 
emotions and radiating soothing vibrations he can greatly 
help that brother on his way. In this way we realise our 
responsibility for even a single impure or evil thought 
which may spread as moral contagion among our fellow- 
men. There are thousands of persons with latent germs of 
evil which may atrophy and die for want of nutrition; but 
if we yield to an unholy thought, its radiating vibrations 
may awaken the latent germs of evil in some man and 
cause them to grow into activity, starting that soul ina 
downward course of evil actions which, in their turn, may 
in future seriously affect thousands of other men. Happily 
this is also true of good thought, and a man by his 
thoughts can become a veritable sun radiating love, calm 
and peace all around him, and this magnificent power is 
within the reach of all, rich and poor alike. 

Q. But what should a man do who cannot control his 
thought or passions and who, though he has often tried to 
do so, has constantly failed ? 

Ans. We should look at the problem scientifically. If 
an evil quality or habit has a certain amount of strength, 
it is because we have not tried to repress that strength, 
but have allowed it to accumulate and gather a mo- 
mentum which makes it difficult now to deal with it. It 
means we have made it easy for ourselves to move along 
certain lines and difficult, though not impossible, to move 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 303 


along others. But even if we have devoted several lives 
to the gathering of such energy, the time so devoted has 
been limited, and the amount of momentum after all can 
only be finite. If we now realise the mistake and want to 
control that habit, we should put forward exactly as much 
strength in the opposite direction as we originally spent in 
gathering that momentum. Of course we will have to 
work patiently as we cannot instantly counteract the 
work of lives, but as souls we can go on generating force 
indefinitely, and though we may often fail, each effort 
will reduce the store of the evil force till it is finally 
exhausted. 

QO. Now how should we utilise our knowledge of this 
power of thought to help others ? 

Ans. We can make thought-forms intentionally and 
aim them at another with the object of helping him. This 
is one of the lines of activity adopted by those who desire 
to serve humanity. We must first remember to think of a 
person as we wish him to be, for the image that we make 
of him will act powerfully upon him and tend to draw him 
into harmony with itself. Again, in thinking of our friends 
we must fix our thoughts on their good qualities. In 
trying to help a friend to get rid of a weakness, we should 
not imagine him as having that evil quality we want 
removed, but think of him intently as possessing the 
Opposite virtue, because by thinking of any quality we 
strengthen its undulations and therefore intensify it. 

From this consideration it follows that the habit 
of gossip or scandal, in which many people thoughtlessly 
indulge themselves, is a horrible wickedness, as in such 
discussions they fix their thought, not upon any good 
quality one may possess, but upon some alleged evil. 
About gossip a Master says thus: 


304 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


‘If you think of the evil in another, you are doing 
at the same time three wicked things : 


“x. You are filling your neighbourhood with 
evil thought instead of with good thought, and so you are 
adding to the sorrow of the world. 


“2. If there is in that man the evil that you 
think, you are strengthening it and feeding it; and so you 
are making your brother worse instead of better. But 
generally the evil is not there, and you have only fancied 
it; and then your wicked thought tempts your brother to 
do wrong ; for if he is not yet perfect, you may make him 
that which you have thought him. 

“3. You fill your own mind with evil thought 
instead of good ; and so you hinder your own growth, and 
make yourself, for those who can see, an ugly and painful 
object instead of a beautiful and lovable one.”’ 

Q. But how should we help one, for instance, under the 
sway of the evil habit of drink or irritabtlity ? 

Ans. We should think helpfully of those whom we love 
or want to help. We should hold before them in thought 
a high ideal of themselves and wish strongly that they may 
be able to attain to it. Knowing a certain defect in a 
man’s character we should not dwell upon it, but should 
formulate a strong thought of the contrary virtue and send 
out waves of that thought to him. If we want to help a 
man addicted to drink, we should first ascertain when the 
patient’s mind is likely to be unemployed, such as his 
time of going to bed; for it would be all the better if that 
man be asleep. Then sitting down we should picture very 
vividly the image of that man seated before us, and fixing 
attention on that image should address to it slowly and 
distinctly the thoughts we want to impress on his mind and 
present them as clear mental images as if laying arguments 
before him. In this case we should place before him a 
vivid picture of the disease and misery entailed by the 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 305 


drink-habit and the consequent nervous break-down with 
its inevitable end. We should not try to control the man, 
but his intelligence should be convinced and his emotions 
aroused and purified. If the man be asleep, he will be 
drawn to us and will animate the image of himself before 
us, but success depends on the concentration and the 
steadiness of our thought and upon the man’s mental con- 
dition at the time, though if he be occupied with thoughts 
of his own, our thought-form will bide its time and do its 
errand of mercy when his train of thoughts exhausts itself. 

In trying to help an irritable man we should similar- 
ly impress on his mind mental images of the disadvantages 
of his loss of control over himself and, wishing him to be 
calm and serene, send him strong, soothing influences. 

Q. What about help by prayers for the well-being of 
the living or of the dead ? 

Ans. The effect of prayers for the “living ’’ and the 
‘‘dead’’ has already been explained in Chapter VI. A 
strong wish for a man’s good, sent to him as a general 
protective agency, will remain about the man as a thought- 
form for a time proportionate to the strength of the 
thought and, acting as a barrier to dangers, will guard 
him against evil. 

Sometimes we cannot do anything for a sufferer as 
his physical brain may be closed to our suggestion by 
prejudice or religious bigotry, but his astral and mental 
bodies are always open for us to help. 

The aid rendered to another by prayer is largely of 
this character, the greater effectiveness of prayer over 
good wishes being due to the greater concentration and 
intensity thrown into the prayer, though sometimes prayers 
call the attention of superhuman intelligences, and direct 


aid may be rendered by Them. 
39 


306 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


The phenomena of mind-cure and faith-cure show 
the power of thought even in the physical world, but since 
it can act more easily in astral and mental worlds, we can 
exercise that power while we see someone suffering from 
sadness or depression as we walk along the street, or ride 
In a tram-car or a carriage. Sending him soothing and 
calm thoughts may help him, and though it may be 
difficult for us to believe that we are at all influencing 
and helping persons by our thoughts, anyone with a 
practice of such efforts will find strong evidence of his 
success. 

The absence of physical bodies is no barrier to the 
force of thought, but on the contrary makes the work 
easier, because there is no heavy physical matter to be set 
vibrating, as is necessary in the case of a living man before 
the thought can reach his waking consciousness ; and so 
we can help, cheer, soothe and counsel the dead by 
our strong thoughts or by prayers as already explained 
in Chapter VI. 

Again, there is the power of combined thought or 
combined prayer to help a common object, and the con- 
templative Orders of the Roman Catholic Church, as 
well as recluses of the Hindu and Buddhist faiths, diffuse 
through the world lofty and noble thoughts, doing infinite 
service to humanity in the mass. 

Q. Can we help by thought even when we ourselves are 
out of the physical body during sleep 7? 

Ans. We can do very effective work when our bodies 
are lying peacefully asleep. Freed from the burden of 
physical bodies we are really more powerful in the effect 
we can produce by thought. An ordinary man during 
sleep is usually engrossed in the subjects which interest him 
during waking life, and several times when he sleeps over 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 307 


a thing before deciding, “the night brings counsel ”’ and 
advice for the important decision. The problem needing 
solution should be quietly held in the mind when going to 
sleep; it should not be debated or argued over, but simply 
stated and left. The Thinker will deal with it when out 
of the body and impress it on the brain, though it is 
advisable to keep paper and pencil by the bed to note 
down the impression immediately on awakening. 

In the same way we can, during our sleep, help a 
friend, dead or alive. We must picture the friend in our 
mind before sleep and determine to find and help him. 
The mental image will draw him to us, and we will 
communicate with him in the astral world. During waking 
hours we can help anyone whom we know to be in sorrow 
or suffering by sitting down and forming a strong thought- 
image of the sufferer and then pouring out a stream of 
compassion, affection and strength; but during night we 
ourselves can go in the astral body to the bed-side of the 
sufferer and, instead of offering merely general consolation, 
can help more effectively by seeing the exact requirements 
of the case. But we must be perfectly calm ere going to 
sleep and should not allow any emotion to be aroused by 
the thought of the friend, as it may cause a swirl in our 
astral body, which may either scare the friend away or 
make it impossible for mental vibrations from us to pass 
outwards. Much good work can be done in this way as 
an astral helper, though we may remember nothing in our 
waking consciousness. 

One more form of good done either in or out of 
physical bodies by the power of thought is the helping of 
good causes or of public movements beneficial to mankind. 
We can assist, inspire and advise all sorts of people who 
may be unlikely to listen to us physically. We can 


308 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


suggest liberal ideas to ministers and statesmen, poets and 
preachers, and writers of books, magazines and newspapers, 
and can even suggest plots to novelists and beneficial 
schemes to philanthropists. 

Q. Can we affect even physical matter by the power of 
thought ? Can our thoughts have effect on the health of 
our physical bodtes ? 

Ans. Much has been written of late years as to the 
influence of thought on the physical body, as diseases are 
both produced and cured by thought. It is found that in 
times of epidemic those who dwell most on the thought of 
the epidemic become easy victims to the fell disease. 

Moreover, it is by the power of thought that Prana 
or vital energy is controlled and poured by the mesmerist 
from his own body to that of the nervous and weak subject 
who thereby regains complete physical health. 

Again, thought is utilised by various methods for the 
curing of physical disease in a systematic way. One such 
method is to keep the mind filled with thoughts of health, 
thinking oneself possessed of a strong healthy body, while 
In mind-cure or faith-cure one is helped in his thought of 
health by strong faith in some thing or person. Another 
method is to withdraw into the silence of our inmost 
being and bringing ourselves into communion with the 
Divine to draw thence all the strength and health we 
need. But there are things of greater importance than 
mere bodily health, and though we need not let our mind 
dwell on pain or sickness, we need not likewise let it dwell 
on thought of health as it entails expenditure of mental 
energy which can wisely be utilised for higher purposes. 

Another effect of thought on physical matter is that 
the constant radiations of our thought-forms impregnate 
the inanimate objects around us, so that even the walls 


THOUGHT-POWER, ITS ACTION AND USE 309 


and pictures of our room reflect those thoughts and 
feelings. The chair, the desk and all surrounding objects 
are unconsciously magnetised by our strong repeated 
thoughts and possess the power of suggesting the same 
type of thoughts to others who come under their influence. 
Thus it was found that a certain prison-cell was so charged 
with the thought of suicide, that all prisoners who were 
put into it committed suicide one after another. The 
efficacy of some kinds of talismans or amulets depends on 
the same principle, the object forming the talisman having 
been impregnated with certain definite kinds of vibrations 
by concentrated thought. 

Thus wrong thought is as swift for evil as right 
thought is for good ; and thought, which is within the power 
of the rich and the poor, the old and the young alike, can 
wound as well as heal, distress as well as comfort. Such 
is the Law of Thought and such its power or effect, and 
happy are they who use it wisely. 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 


Question. What do you mean by the‘ Evolution of Life’ ? 

Answer. The word ‘evolution’ from the Latin verb 
‘evolvere ’"—to roll out, is used to denote the unfolding 
of ever higher and higher forms out of lower ones. 
According to Herbert Spencer, “ evolution is the homo- 
geneous becoming the heterogeneous, the simple becoming 
the complex.’’ As Darwin pointed out, all nature is ina 
state of evolution, lower forms ever giving place to higher, 
simpler ones to more complex, as the bud to the flower, 
the flower to the fruit. 

But the doctrine of evolution did not wait for 
Darwin to give it expression, though the credit of 
propounding it scientifically belongs to him. Science and 
Religion are both summed up in the saying of a Persian 
mystic: ‘‘ God sleeps in the mineral, dreams in the vege- 
table, wakes to consciousness in the animal, to self- 
consciousness in the man, and will awake to divine con- 
sciousness in the man made perfect.’’ Those deeply 
versed in the esoteric teachings of any religion may find 
anticipations of many truths which modern science has 
not yet reached, and if science made common cause with 
religion, the progress of humanity would be greatly 
accelerated. 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 311 


The grosser side of manifestation of the One Life 
is that which is described as matter. Now there are two 
poles in manifestation: the form-side, or the pole of 
matter, on the one hand, and the life-side, or the pole of 
Spirit, on the other. They are the two opposite aspects of 
the one Eternal Life, and the process of evolution consists 
in that life in its dual aspects going outwards to cause 
diversity, and when the limit of diversity is reached, 
drawing inwards to reintegrate the diverse separated units 
into a mighty and enriched unity. The outward-going 
life seeks diversity and may be said therefore to tend to 
the pole of matter; the inward-turning life seeks unity, 
and may be said therefore to tend to the pole of Spirit. 

The Law of Evolution, as propounded by the 
Darwinian School, demonstrates with scientific accuracy 
the gradual perfection of forms and has for its foundation 
the universal presence of Protoplasm—the physical basis of 
life. In the lowest forms of animal life this protoplasm is 
undifferentiated, existing simply as a homogeneous jelly-like 
mass, but in higher forms it is educated into cells of differ- 
ent shapes, sizes and functions, and the animal kingdom is 
classified into Orders, etc., according to the relative 
complexity of the structures involved. This classification 
indicates that the more evolved the life, the more elaborate 
will be the form through which it functions. 

In the details of Embryology lies the proof of 
Evolution itself, since it shows all animal forms to have 
passed, during the stages of their development, through the 
whole gamut of all the lower species. At the moment of 
fertilisation, the ovum consists of a single cell, which mul- 
tiplies rapidly by division, and it is during these subsequent 
Stages of development that the differences first appear 
which, later on, result in the production of all the 


312 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


countless varieties of forms. Buta study of the embryos of 
different animals has shown that all of them pass in turn 
through exactly the same stages. That is, a comparison 
of the embryos of a fish, fowl, calf and man reveals 
the fact that the primary stages through which all of 
them pass are identical, the lower and less evolved 
forms ceasing, one after the other, from further develop- 
ment, dropping out of the race, as it were, when the 
appointed standard of development is reached, until 
only the human embryo is left to complete the course. 
This so-called Recapitulation Theory means that during 
the course of its development each animal gives an epitome 
of its race, showing step by step all the stages through 
which forms have evolved during the course of countless 
ages. 

Evolution may correctly be defined as the study of 
evolving forms during the unfolding of consciousness. 
Science studies only the evolving form under the ‘ Law of 
Evolution,’ but Theosophy studies also the unfolding life 
under the Law of Reincarnation, as the one Law is the 
necessary concomitant of the other, and both these Laws 
are necessary for a complete understanding of life. 

Thus though evolution, according to science, 1s 
merely the building together of higher and more compli- 
cated organisms, these organisms are really meant to 
express with greater and greater perfection the Divine 
Life that is seeking manifestation in the universe. The 
great point to remember here is that there is an evolution 
not only of form, but also of life. In fact, the evolution 
is primarily of life, and not of form—though forms also 
evolve and grow better, mainly in order to be suitable 
vehicles for the more advanced life. In a scheme of 
evolution the Divine Life involves itself more and more 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 313 


deeply in matter in order to receive through it certain 
vibrations which cannot affect the Life directly. These 
vibrations or impacts from without arouse corresponding 
vibrations, within the Life,so that the Life learns to re- 
spond to them and later on to generate them from within 
itself, thereby developing the spiritual powers folded 
within it. 

Thus all evolution consists essentially of an evolving 
Life passing from form to form as it evolves and storing 
up in itself the experiences gained through the forms, until 
the original germ of life becomes the perfect image of God. 

Q. But what is the motive power of evolution ? 

Ans. It is the Life which involves itself in matter 
before it evolves complicated organisms of every kind, and 
its whole course may be thought of in two stages—the 
gradual assumption of grosser and grosser matter, 1.¢., 
involution, and then the gradual casting off of vehicles 
which have been assumed, 2.e., evolution. But to under- 
stand this a conception of the Three Great Outpourings 
is necessary. 

Q. What ts meant by the Three Great Outpourings ? 

Ans. The impulses which built the seven _inter- 
penetrating worlds with their elements from the ocean 
of interstellar space, as stated in Chapter II, came 
from the Third Logos, from Brahmi, and are called the 
‘First Great Outpouring,’ or the First Life-Wave. 

Acting through His Third Aspect He sends forth the 
successive impulses of force into the stupendous sphere 
which defines the limit of His field of activity. The first 
impulse sets up all through the sphere a vast number 
of tiny vortices. each of which draws into itself forty-nine 
bubbles, and arranges them in a certain shape. The 


groupings of bubbles so formed are the atoms of the 
40 


314 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


second of the interpenetrating worlds. The whole number 
of bubbles is not used in this way, sufficient being left in 
the dissociated state to act as atoms for the first or 
highest of these worlds. In due course comes another 
impulse which seizes upon nearly all these forty-nine- 
bubble atoms, leaving only enough to provide atoms for 
the second world, draws them back into itself and then, 
throwing them out again, sets up among them vortices, 
each of which holds within itself 492 or 2,401 bubbles. 
These form the atoms of the third world. The next 
impulse in the same way Seizes upon nearly all these 
2,401 bubble atoms, draws them back into their original 
form, and again throws them outward once more as the 
atoms of the fourth world—each atom containing this 
time 49° or 49X2,401 bubbles. This process is repeated 
for an atom of the fifth or mental plane with 494 or 
2,401 X2,401 bubbles, for an atom of the sixth or astral 
plane with 49° or 49X2,401 X2,401 bubbles and for an 
atom of the seventh or physical plane with 49° or 2,401 ¥ 
2,401 X2,401 bubbles, with a definite number of bubbles in 
addition, owing to the peculiar formation of the physical 
atom. 

Thus does this vast Wave of Life well forth 
from the Logos, pulsating through the whole solar system 
and breaking itself into endless fragments—as the smooth 
current dashing itself over a precipice breaks into 
myriads of separate drops—in order to become the 
life-atoms called matter. There is not one atom, one 
particle of matter, that has not the life of God as its 
life. There is nothing that is dead. Hence what 
science calls matter is really spirit-matter, Spirit made 
manifest, and of this living matter are the worlds built. 
Matter is the necessary vehicle of manifestation for Spirit ; 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 335 


neither can exist without the other, and the Divine Life 
becomes Spirit only when it ensouls matter. 

When the atoms of each of the seven planes 
have been created, then the Third Logos creates the 
subplanes of each plane. The atoms of each plane 
are swept into groups of two, three, four, etc., to make 
its subplanes. The first or highest subplane is com- 
posed of the single atoms themselves, while the second, 
third and other lower subplanes are made by combinations 
of these atoms. Thus, as stated before in Chapter II, 
the highest subplane of the physical plane is composed 
of simple physical atoms, of two varieties—the positive 
and the negative—and by the combinations of these atoms 
are built the remaining subplanes of that plane. It is 
in the course of building the subplanes of the physical 
world that the chemical elements are produced which 
are the basic materials for the building of all physical 
forms. In this way the lower subdivisions of each 
plane come into existence, and the Divine Spirit becomes 
more and more veiled in matter in its descent. 

Then into the matter thus vivified the Second Out- 

pouring of Life descends from the Second Aspect of the 
Deity, Vishnu, which combining the elements, or aggre- 
gations of atoms, into organisms and ensouling them gives 
characteristics or qualities to matter, enabling the matter 
to answer in different ways to different stimuli from out- 
Side, one kind of atom and its aggregations answering to 
changes of thought, another responding to changes of 
emotion and desire, and so on. 

This Second Life-Wave, called the Monadic essence 
especially when clothed in atomic matter of various planes, 
having descended through higher planes, comes to the 
mental plane, where it throws the matter of that plane, 


316 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


already by the nature of its atoms capable of responding 
by vibrations to thought-changes, into combinations fit to 
express thoughts—abstract thoughts in the subtler matter, 
concrete thoughts in the coarser. Out of these two kinds 
of mental matter, the higher and the lower, are made later 
the causal and the mental bodies. As the first and second 
elemental essence, the Wave builds on this plane the first 
and second elemental kingdoms in its higher and lower 
levels respectively. Passing onwards into the astral 
plane, the Life-Wave forms on each subplane the 
combinations fit to express sensations (out of which astral 
matter or desire-stuff is made later the desire body), 
builds on that plane the third elemental kingdom and 
is named the third elemental essence or the elemental 
essence of the astral plane. At its two latter stages as 
the second and the third elemental essence, it is very 
intimately connected with man, as it enters largely into 
the composition of his various vehicles, and influences 
his thought and action, as already described for mental 
and astral elementals in Chapter III. Descending 
further into the physical world it forms on each subplane 
the combinations fitted to constitute physical bodies—the 
future chemical elements, as they are called on the three 
lower subplanes—and builds on that plane the mineral 
kingdom, when it is sometimes called the mineral monad ; 
but at the central point of that stage the downward 
pressure ceases and is replaced by an upward tendency ; 
the Outbreathing or involution has ceased, and the 
indrawing or evolution commences. The work of 
the second Life-Wave, being that of forming combi- 
nations which show qualities, is spoken of as the giving 
of qualities. The varying powers of each atom and 
its aggregations are given by this Life-Wave on its 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 317 


downward sweep until it reaches the lowest point 
of its huge circle, 1.¢., the middle stage of the mineral 
kingdom, and then the Life-Wave begins to climb 
upwards, building forms out of the matter which now 
shows the qualities imparted to it on the downward 
sweep. This matter, now showing qualities—powers of 
response, #.¢., of internal rearrangement under the impact 
of stimuli—is drawn together and aggregated into forms— 
mineral, vegetable and animal forms, and lastly forms of 
animal man. It is the energy of the Second Logos which, 
ensouling the matter of the seven planes, enables it to 
build forms. Each form persists only so long as the 
Life of the Second Logos holds the matter in that form. 
Now for the first time appear the phenomena of birth, 
growth, decay and death; a form is born because the 
Life of the Second Logos has the work of evolution to do 
through that form; it grows while that work is progress- 
ing; it shows signs of decay when the Second Logos 
slowly withdraws the life from the form; it dies when 
finally the Second Logos withdraws all of the life, in 
order to send it back again to build a newer and better form, 
which can give to the life the new experiences necessary 
for its further growth. The second Life-Wave thus 
gives qualities to matter and then builds forms from that 
matter, viz., the seven kingdoms of nature—the three 
elemental kingdoms, and the mineral, the vegetable, the 
animal and the human kingdom. The last kingdom has 
only its form given to it in the beginning, and the real 
tenant takes possession of that house only after the 
Third Great Outpouring has acted upon it. 

There are five spheres from the physical up to the 
Nirvanic plane, which make up the field of evolution. 
Beyond these on the highest, the Mahdparanirvanic 


318 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


plane, dwells in the perfection of His own nature the 
Lord of the system, Ishvara unmanifest. On the second 
plane shine out His Aspects, manifested powers, the 
Logoi from whom the Life-Waves come, Powers 
which make matter and build forms, and the Regenera- 
tive Power from whom the Third Life-Wave is to 
come. There also dwell the seeds of Divinity, the Monads, 
emanations which are to be human spirits in the field of 
evolution; and the Third Life-Wave consists of these 
human spirits sent to ensoul and utilise the bodies 
prepared for them through long ages of evolution, the 
slow climbing from mineral to plant, from plant to 
animal, from animal to animal-man. Then comes the time 
when the human-divine spirits—the Monads—that have 
been waiting the time for their advent, hover over the 
human forms that are being prepared for them, though they 
are yet unable to guide orcontrol them. These form the 
Third Great Outpouring, the fragments of Divinity 
ensouling the forms prepared for their coming, and 
making them tabernacles worthy of God. 

Thus the First Life-Wave came forth from the 
Third Logos of the Theosophist, Brahma of the Hindu, 
the Holy Spirit, the Third Person of the Christian Trinity, 
formed the atoms ensouled by Him, drew them together 
and built up the numerous aggregations of the various 
types of atoms into elements; 1.¢., built the seven great 
planes, with their subplanes, of the solar system. The 
Second Life-Wave descended from the Second Logos, 
Vishnu, the Son, the Second Person of the Christian 
Trinity, gave to matter characteristics or qualities and 
built forms; while the Third Life-Wave came from the 
First Logos, Shiva or Mahadeva, the Liberator, the 
Father, the First Person of the Christian Trinity, and 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 319 


poured out the human spirits to ensoul the forms. These 
three great Waves or currents of evolution are distinguish- 
able on our earth in connection with humanity: the making 
of the material, the building of the house, and the growing 
of the tenant of the house; or the evolution of spirit- 
matter, the evolution of form, and the evolution of self- 
consciousness. 

So the outpoured Life was involved in matter, and 
these germs of Life, these myriad seeds, all came from one 
Ishvara. Qualities are to be brought out of these seeds, 
and these qualities are powers, but powers manifested 
through matter; and evolution consists in the drawing out 
of these powers. Evolution can therefore be summed up 
in one phrase thus: it is latent potentialities becoming 
active powers. 

Now it is the infolded Deity that is the hidden 
motive power and makes evolution at once possible and 
inevitable, the upward lifting force that overcomes every 
obstacle and is the guarantee of man’s final triumph. 

Q. But does not the Life coming from Ishvara contain 
in itself everything already developed, every manifested 
power, every possibility realised as actuality ? Why from 
the Perfect should the imperfect come forth and then return 
into that perfection whence it came? Why this long 
evolution and what is the goal or purpose of this evolution 
of life ? 

Ans. The question is based on a fundamental mis- 
understanding. The One willed to multiply. Multiph- 
Cation necessarily means division and therefore limitation, 
and limitation necessarily implies imperfection. That 
limitation is also shown by the use of the word ‘ spark ' 
for the universe, or ‘sparks’ for individual lives. It 
Shows the limitation that comes with manifestation, and 


320 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


gives the idea that the spark fed with suitable fuel will be 
developed into the likeness of the Fire whence it came, and 
also that the spark is of the same nature as the Flame, 
the Supreme Brahman. That spark contains everything in 
latency, but nothing at first in manifestation. It has every- 
thing in germs but nothing at first as developed organism. 

Into the matter brought into manifestation by 
Brahma, Vishnu places not Himself with the force of His 
unfolded powers, but the seed of His life, capable of evolu- 
tion, containing everything within it potentially, but 
showing forth nothing in manifestation. The germs from 
the life of Ishvara evolve step by step, stage by stage, all 
the powers that reside in the generating Father ; from 
that seed is to evolve a life rising higher and higher until 
a centre of consciousness is formed capable of expanding 
to the consciousness of Ishvara, while remaining as a 
centre still, with the power to come forth as a new Logos 
from whom new universes may evolve. 

The building of such centres is the purpose of the 
evolution of life, the building being done stage by stage as 
the life passes from form to form, till the Son becomes 
what he has ever been potentially, one with the Father. 

What issues forth from the Divine is only a mass 
of Monadic essence without individualisation, not human 
Monads, still less all-wise and all-good ones. The differ- 
ence between its condition when issuing forth and when 
returning is exactly like that between a mass of nebulous 
substance and the solar system evolved out of it. The 
nebula is beautiful but vague and useless, while the sun 
formed from it by slow evolution pours down light and 
heat upon many worlds. 

Speaking in more homely language, when we start- 
ed on our long pilgrimage we were, as it were, asleep, but 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 321 


having passed through numerous stages in all kinds of 
forms, we shall, at the end of our journey as man, have 
achieved the goal marked out for us during this age or 
dispensation, and become Adepts or Beings of goodness, 
power and wisdom, but our evolution will continue beyond 
that level till each one of us becomes a God. 

Q. How did the Divine Life, in the first upward stage 
of evolution in the mineral, vegetable and animal 
kingdoms, evolve in the germinal life the power to 
respond 7 

Ans. The whole working of the Life can be summed 
up as the receiving of vibrations from matter without 
and the answering of vibrations from itself within. In 
the mineral kingdom—in metals, stones and what is known 
as inorganic matter—the Life, the Monad of form, Atma- 
Buddhi, the outbreathed Life of the Logos, has the 
capacity to respond, but in a limited manner, partly 
owing to its germinal nature and partly owing to the 
rigidity of its surrounding vehicle. ‘ God sleeps in the 
mineral,’ and so the brooding life of Vishnu modifies and 
softens the rigidity of its material and calls the inner 
essence into activity by blows, by vibrations, by tremendous 
impacts like earthquakes and volcanoes—the crushing 
and grinding of materials on a gigantic scale—until a stage 
of plasticity is reached with a lessened opposition from 
the form without and a more active response from the life 
within, when the beginnings of the vegetable world can be 
brought into existence. 

After the life in the mineral has developed the 
power of response to outside impacts, the next stage in 
evolution, attained in the vegetable kingdom, is that the 
response takes on the form of sensation: the power of 


responding to the outside impact by a feeling within the 
41 


322 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


life, the sensation appearing as pleasure when the life 
responds to harmonious impacts from without, and as 
pain when the impacts are discordant. 

Then we come to the stage which is manifested 
when life evolves through the animal kingdom. Pleasure 
and pain are now acutely felt, but in addition, a germ of 
recognition called perception, connecting objects and sen- 
sations, begins. The dawning life develops the power of 
forming a link between the object that impresses it and the 
sensation that responds to that object ; and when the life 
knows an object as giving pleasure or pain, ¢.e., perceives 
the object, the faculty of perception, the making of links 
between the outer and inner worlds, is evolved, and mental 
power begins to germinate in that organism, as we find in 
the higher animals. But all along it is the evolving 
life which carries on from an outworn form, as well 
as from a lower kingdom of nature to a higher one—from 
the mineral to the vegetable, and from the vegetable 
to the animal kingdom—the experience which it has 
gained. 

With the power of moving from place to place the 
opportunities of animals for gathering experience increase, 
as they can thus themselves come into contact with 
external objects, instead of having to wait, like the mineral 
and the vegetable, for the coming to them of those objects 
before responding to them. With the struggle for exist- 
ence—the tremendous competition in nature for food— 
with the love of fellows which appears in the mother and 
father instinct, the leader instinct (bulls), and gregarious- 
ness, by vicissitudes, by hunting and being hunted, the 
animal develops craft, foresight, powers of self-defence, 
bravery and other higher qualities which eventually make 
possible the coming of man, though even when the 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 323 


animal-man appears on the stage of life, there is some- 
thing yet wanting for real manhood. 

Q. Then ts not man descended from the brute ? Is he not 
evolved out of the animal as the Darwinian theory asserts ? 

Ans, That is not true. It is only a fragment of truth 
half seen and hence distorted. The matter of his lower 
vehicles has been prepared in previous ages by evolving 
through the lower stages of the elemental, mineral, vege- 
table and animal kingdoms in order that it may be built 
into the form of man. 

In previous cycles, forms had been evolved that 
might fairly be described as half-ape, half-human, that were 
never occupied by the triple-Self and that consequently 
belonged to the animal, and not to the human kingdom. 
In the present cycle the human form evolved, passing 
rapidly through the lower stages on the way to the human, 
as does a foetus in pre-natal life, and therefore has stamped 
upon it the stages through which it has passed. It will 
thus be seen that man is not merely a development from 
the animal as is believed by those who take the somewhat 
crude view of the theory of evolution. The matter has 
been made plastic in the animal, but the man in his form 
is the result of a higher working, and the germ of his life 
can never develop into the animal. It develops only into 
the human, as more life having been folded into it, that 
germ must unfold along a line of direct human growth. It 
is the Third Great Outpouring, the Third Life-Wave, 
which brings down those human spirits which have been 
waiting to take up their habitation in the forms prepared 
for their reception and to ensoul and utilise those bodies as 
explained before. 

Q. Has each plant and each animal a separate soul 
like man ? 


324 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Ass. No. Each man ¢s a soul, but not each animal or 
plant. When the Second Outpouring came from the Deity, 
it might have been homogeneous ; but when it first comes 
within practical cognisance on the Buddhic plane, it is seen 
not as one huge world-soul, but as many souls; not one 
Monad, but many; while in humanity it is seen broken up 
into millions of little souls of individual men; so in the 
intermediate condition the world-soul is already subdivided, 
though not to its utmost limit of individualisation as found 
in man. Thus manasa soul manifests through one body 
at a time in the physical world, while an animal soul mani- 
fests through a number of animal bodies, except in the 
most advanced animals in a state of domestication, each of 
which has really become a separate reincarnating entity, 
although not yet possessing a causal body—the mark of 
what is usually called ‘ individualisation ’. 

Q. Then what becomes of the animal or plant after 
death ? 

Ans. When a man dies or lays aside his physical body, 
he, being a soul by himself, remains separate from other 
souls; but when an animal, say a tiger, dies, he not being 
a permanently separate soul, that which formed his soul 
is, after some period of conscious life in the astral world, 
poured back into that mass, called a group-soul, from 
which it came and which provided souls for many other 
tigers. The true animal is not the body, but an invisible 
life which acts to the animal form as does the soul of man 
to man’s body. This invisible life, energising the animal 
form, is called the group-soul. The group-soul is a cer- 
tain definite quantity of mental matter charged with the 
energy of the Logos; this mental matter contains a 
definite life at the animal grade of evolution. An animal 
group-soul was in the previous cycle a vegetable group-soul, 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 325 


and in the earlier cycle still, a mineral group-soul, so that 
any animal group-soul is already highly specialised as the 
result of its experiences in vegetable and mineral matter. 

Each group-soul has attached to it a number 
of animal bodies, say one hundred tiger bodies for one 
particular group-soul. Then each of these tiger bodies 
has one-hundredth of a group-soul attached to it, and, like 
man, is quite separate during physical life, but that tiger 
is not a permanent individual, and, after death and the 
short astral life that follows it, has his soul merged back 
into his own group-soul. 

This can be more easily conceived by an analogy. 
Suppose there is a bucket containing one hundred tumblers 
of water, the water representing the whole group-soul, and 
the hundred tumblers the hundred tiger bodies. Each 
tumbler dipped into the bucket takes out a tumblerful of 
water which takes the form of that tumbler and Is separate 
temporarily from the water remaining in the bucket and 
from the water in the other tumblers. Now if some 
colouring matter is put into each separate tumbler, that 
represents the qualities developed by each of the separate 
tiger souls during his life-time. The death of the animal 
will be typified by pouring back the water from the tum- 
bler into the bucket. But as the colouring distributed 
through the whole water in the bucket will be much fainter 
than when it was confined to one tumbler, the qualities of 
one tiger are shared after his death by all the tigers in the 
whole group-soul, though in a smaller degree. Also we 
can never get the identical tumblerful of water a second 
time from the bucket, while every tumblerful taken from 
it in future will give some trace of the colouring of all the 
different tumblerfuls of water poured back into it. Simi- 
larly, no tiger can be reborn with the identical portion of 


326 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


the group-soul, while the qualities developed by a single 
tiger become the common property of all the tigers to be 
born from that group-soul in the future, though in a lesser 
degree than that in which they existed in the original tiger. 
Thus appear inherited instincts, the continually repeated 
experiences stored up in the group-soul, “ accumulated 
hereditary experiences’? in the new forms, and this ex- 
plains why a duckling hatched by a hen takes to water 
without having to learn swimming, why a chicken just out 
of its shell will cower at the shadow of a hawk, and why 
a bird, artificially hatched, knows how to make a nest, 
without ever having seen one, according to the traditions 
of its kind. 

Reincarnation, therefore, is in reality a process 
that affects all life in all organisms, though it is usually 
thought of as peculiar to the souls of men. The life of 
the rose that dies returns to its subdivision of the Rosace@ 
group-soul, and then incarnates as another rose; the 
puppy that dies of distemper returns to its Canide group- 
soul and later incarnates as a puppy of another litter. 
With man the only difference is that, being an individual 
consciousness, he does not at death return to any group- 
soul, but reincarnates with all the faculties of his previous 
lives as his exclusive possession without sharing them with 
other individuals. 

Q. How many physical bodies has each group-soul 
attached to si 7? 

Ans. Countless millions of smaller insect bodies are 
attached to one group-soul, quadrillions of flies or mosqui- 
toes, millions of rats or mice, hundreds of thousands of 
rabbits or sparrows; while a plant-soul has attached to 
it an enormous number of plant bodies, perhaps, in some 
cases of grass, a whole species. 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 327 


The differences of climate and other variations in 
environment draw out of the individual forms differences 
of response in the indwelling life, according to the part of 
the country where that life is being manifested; each 
form takes back to its group-soul a particular type of 
experience and tendency. As time passes and experiences 
accumulate, the group-souls gradually develop well-marked 
divisions and afterwards break up, each splitting into two, 
like a cell separating by fission, and again subdividing and 
splitting, so that higher up in the animal kingdom com- 
paratively a small number of physical forms represents 
one group-soul. In fact, just as genera subdivide into 
species and families, so too does each group-soul slowly 
divide itself into smaller and smaller group-souls, contain- 
ing more and more specialised characteristics and tenden- 
cies. In this way as the experience grows ever richer, 
the group-souls grow smaller but more numerous, until at 
the highest point we arrive at man with his single indi- 
vidual soul, which no longer returns into a group, but 
remains always separate. 

Q. Does the evolving life begin from the lowest mani- 
festation in each kingdom and end with the highest ? 

Ans. The life-force goes through a definite course of 
evolution, ordinarily beginning from the lower manifesta- 
tions of a kingdom and ending with the highest. In the 
vegetable kingdom, for example, the life-force might com- 
mence its career by occupying grasses or mosses and end it 
by ensouling magnificent forest trees. In the animal it 
might commence with mosquitoes or animalcula and might 
end with mammalia. Still if the group-soul or the life 
ensouling a group of forms or bodies has ensouled forest 
trees, when ii passes into the animal kingdom, it will omit 
all the lower stages, not inhabiting insects or reptiles, but 


328 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


will begin at the level of lower mammalia, while insects 
and reptiles will be vivified by group-souls which have left 
the vegetable kingdom at a lower level. Similarly, the 
group-soul which has reached the highest level of animal 
kingdom will not individualise into primitive savages, but 
into men of a somewhat higher type, while the primitive 
savages will be recruited from the group-souls which have 
left the animal kingdom at a lower level. 

The whole process is one of steady evolution from 
the lower and simpler forms to the higher and more 
complex ones, but, as stated before, the evolution is 
primarily of life—differentiated into seven fundamental 
types or Rays—and not of form, though forms also 
evolve and grow better, mainly in order to be suitable 
vehicles for the more advanced life; and when that life 
has reached the highest level in the animal kingdom, it 
passes into the human kingdom by individualisation. 

QO. .What are the seven Rays or fundamental types into 
which the One Life differentiates itself ? 

Ans. All life comes from God, but it comes from Him 
through different channels. The Seven Spirits before 
the throne of God, His seven great Ministers, are very 
much more than mere servants or messengers; they are 
rather God’s very members in and through whom He 
works, channels of His power, part of Himself. The 
Divine Life pours forth through these seven Ministers, 
and it is coloured by the channel through which it passes ; 
through all its long evolution it bears the stamp of one 
or other of these mighty Spirits; it is always life of that 
type and of no other, whether it be at the mineral, 
vegetable, animal or human stage of its development. 

Thus the One Life, long before it begins its work 
in mineral matter, differentiates itself into seven great 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 329 


streams or fundamental types of life, called Rays, 
each of which has its own special and unchanging 
characteristics. 

Hence it follows that these seven types are to be 
found among men and that all men must belong to one 
or other of them. Fundamental differences of this sort 
in the human race have always been recognised; a 
century ago men were described as of the lymphatic 
or the sanguine type, the vital or the phlegmatic; and 
astrologers classify them under the names of the planets, 
as Jupiter men, Mars men, Venus or Saturn men, and 
so on. But there is a better method of stating the basic 
differences of disposition due to the channel through 
which men happen to have come forth, and the special 
qualities or principal characteristics of each of the seven 
Rays may be given respectively as 1. Strength, Will 
or Power; 2. Wisdom; 3. Adaptgbility or Tact; 4. 
Beauty or Harmony; 5. Science (detailed knowledge) ; 
6. Devotion; 7. Ordered Service (ceremonial magic 
which invokes angelic help). 

In the Occult Hierarchy (see Chapter X) the seven 
Rays are clearly distinguished. The First or Ruling Ray 
is governed by the Lord of the World; at the head of the 
Second Ray stands the Lord Buddha; and under These 
come respectively the Manu and the Bodhisattva of the 
root-race which is predominant in the world at any given 
time. The Mahdachohan, parallel in rank with the last 
Two, supervises all the other five Rays, each of which 
nevertheless has also its own Head at the level of the 
Chohan Initiation. 

The seven Rays have their expression and corre- 
spondences in the seven tones of the musical scale 


and the seven colours of the solar spectrum. Each of 
42 


330 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


these Rays influences the world in turn. The Sixth or 
Devotional Ray was dominant during the Middle Ages ; 
as its power waned, there was a period of disbelief, 
irreligion and profound ignorance of the inner side of 
life. The Seventh Ray involves the study and use of 
the inner forces of Nature, and intelligent co-operation 
with the Powers which wield them. That is the 
influence which is now dawning upon the world, and 
therefore the Seventh Ray is just now coming into 
operation. 

The Fourth and Fifth Rays are predominantly 

positive or masculine, and the Third and Sixth Rays 
predominantly negative or feminine, while the Second 
Ray is dual but about equally balanced, the First Ray 
dual but with the masculine intensified, and the Seventh 
Ray dual but with the feminine intensified. 
. Each of these seven streams or Rays again 
differentiates itself into seven modifications, called sub- 
rays. These forty-nine variants of the One Life-stream 
follow their forty-nine distinct channels through all the 
great kingdoms, and there is no mingling of one type of 
life with another type. 

Q. Now, how does the tndividualisation from the 
animal kingdom take place, and what is its method ? 

Ans. The method of individualisation is to raise the 
soul of a particular animal to a level so much higher than 
that attained by its group-soul that it can no longer return 
to the latter. 

The individualisation from the animal kingdom 
usually takes place through association with the humanity 
of the period. It cannot be done with every animal, but 
only with such as have their brains developed to a certain 
level, mainly through close contact with man. 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 331 


All wild animals can be arranged into seven lines— 
the seven fundamental types of life or Rays, mentioned above 
—Jeading up to domestic animals, the fox, the jackal, and the 
wolf culminating in the dog; the lion, the tiger, the leopard, 
the jaguar and the ocelot leading up to the domestic cat, 
and so on. Individualisation is possible only from domestic 
animals, and at the head of each of the seven types stands 
some kind of domestic animal like the dog, the cat, the 
elephant, the monkey, the horse; and a group-soul, say, 
of two hundred foxes may divide at a later stage by 
breaking up, as explained before, into ten group-souls of 
twenty dogs each. 

Now, a dog treated kindly unfolds intellectual 
powers in trying to understand and please his master, and 
develops affection for that human friend; while the 
thoughts and emotions of the master, constantly acting 
upon those of the dog, tend to raise him to a higher level 
intellectually and emotionally till the development has 
proceeded far enough to enable the dog to remain as a 
separate entity without his soul being poured back into the 
group-soul, and while doing so, to become a vehicle for 
the Third Great Outpouring. It is by the junction of this 
Outpouring with the fragment of the group-soul that the 
individual is formed ; thus individualisation takes place by 
the Third Great Outpouring effecting a junction with the 
Second Great Outpouring. 

This Third Great Outpouring from the First 
Logos, Mahadeva, does not affect thousands simultane- 
ously, but comes to each one individually. 

The specialisation of an animal out of a group-soul, 
Say, of a dog out of a dog-group-soul, is due not only to 
the higher viorations sent towards him from the dog’s 
master and friends, but also to the fact that a Monad, “a 


332 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


fragment of Divinity,” is seeking to form an ego or soul in 
order to begin his human experiences. This Monad long 
ago attached to himself an atom of each of the planes as a 
centre on each, as an earnest sent in advance with a view 
to his future work. These permanent atoms, spoken of 
before in Chapter IV, were sent out into the elemental, 
mineral, vegetable and animal group-souls in succession, 
there to receive whatever experiences they could. When 
the permanent atoms find themselves in touch with a 
highly specialised part of the animal group-soul, like the 
soul of the dog, then the Monad sends down from his high 
plane certain influences in response to the outer work done 
for the soul of the dog by his human friends. Descending 
no lower than the Buddhic plane he effects a junction, like 
the formation of a water-spout, with the soul of the 
domestic animal who makes an upward leap from below. 
The energy of the Monad pours into the mental matter 
which has stood to the dog as his little soul ; that mental 
matter rearranges itself into a causal body, to become the 
vehicle of this ‘“‘ Son in the Bosom of the Father ’’ who has 
descended to become a human soul. Thus the soul-matter 
of the dog, the water in the bucket, mentioned before, 
becomes itself a vehicle for something much higher—for 
the Third Great Outpouring—and instead of acting as a 
soul, it is itself ensouled. There is no exact analogy on 
the physical plane except that of pumping air into water 
under high pressure and thereby making it aerated water. 
If that symbolism be accepted, the water which was 
previously the animal soul has now become the causal 
body of a man; and the air pumped into it is the ego—the 
soul of man which is but a partial manifestation of the 
Monad. This descent of the ego is symbolised in ancient 
mythology by the Greek idea of the crater or Cup, and by 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 333 


the medizval story of the Holy Grail; for the Grail or the 
Cup is the perfected result of all that lower evolution, into 
which is poured the Wine of the Divine Life, so that the 
soul of man may be born. So what has previously been 
the animal soul becomes in the case of man what is called 
the causal body, which exists in the higher part of the 
mental plane as the permanent vehicle occupied by the ego 
or human soul. The young ego, the newly formed human 
soul, absorbs into himself all the experiences which the 
matter of his causal body has had, so that nothing what- 
ever is lost, and he carries these on with him through the 
ages of his existence. Thus is formed in the higher mental 
world an ego, a permanent individuality, which endures 
through all incarnations till the man, transcending even 
that individuality, reaches back to the divine Unity from 
which he came. 

From the time that the soul of a dog separates him- 
self from his group-soul, the dog has in reality ceased to be 
a dog, though he has still a dog’s form. From this point of 
separation up to the actual formation of the causal body 
there are several stages of transformation, until finally as 
a result of the increased outpouring from the higher planes 
by the Monad, the causal body is made. These stages can 
be hastened by the proper understanding by men of the 
process of individualisation, so that our animal friends 
may pass swiftly to the reception of that Divine Outpour- 
ing which makes of each a soul of man. 

Q. Then what is the difference between the highest 
animal and the lowest man ? 

Ans. At individualisation, all that has been the highest 
of the animal becomes now merely a vehicle for a frag- 
ment of Divinity, the Monad. In making the ego, the 
fragment of the group-soul which was always playing the 


334 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


part of an ensouling force, becomes itself in turn the 
ensouled, for it builds itself into a form, a vehicle 
(symbolised as the Cup, the Holy Grail)—the causal body, 
a splendid ovoid of living light—which is ensouled by the 
ego, a fragment of the Monad, the divine Spark of the 
Third Outpouring from on high. That Spark was hover- 
ing over the group-soul in the Monadic world through the 
whole of the previous evolution, but was unable to effect a 
junction with it till the fragment of the group-soul in the 
animal had developed sufficiently to permit it. This 
breaking away from the rest of the group-soul and devel- 
oping a separate ego with his causal body, marks the 
distinction between the highest animal and the lowest 
man. 

There is an infinite gap in evolution between the 
highest anthropoid ape and the youngest individualised 
soul, and also a great difference between a highly domesti- 
cated animal and the lowest man; in the latter Is the life 
of a Monad who is in reality an utterly different stream 
of energy and consciousness of the Divine Life from what 
is found in kingdoms lower than man, while in the former 
we have as yet only the higher manifestations of animal 
life. 

QO. What, now, is the method of human evolution ? 

Ans. Humanity evolves through successive races and 
sub-races, characterised by particular qualities that are 
wanted for the full growth of man. Men take birth in 
various root-races in turn in order that definite qualities 
may be developed within them. One race has some special 
characteristic with which it endows man ; another has quite 
another characteristic as its object; and so man has to 
pass through these different stages for the purpose of 
developing certain qualities, learning certain lessons at 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 335 


each stage, just asa boy at school goes from class to class 
learning something new in each one. 


‘“‘ Man as yet is being made, and ere the crowning 
age of ages 

Shall not zon after zon pass and touch him into 
shape? 

All about him shadows still, but while the races 
flower and fade 

Prophet-eyes may catch a glory slowly gaining 
on the shade.”’ 

Our world is inconceivably old, as now acknow- 
ledged even by science, and humanity has existed upon it 
for millions of years. If human bodies have been growing 
better, it is because the souls gradually evolving into ever 
higher and higher stages need a better class of vehicles for 
their expression. Each man comes forth from God, and 
when he has passed through thousands of different stages 
in all kinds of forms and become perfectly wise and 
perfectly loving, he will have completed his human 
evolution and be re-united with Him who is the Source of 
all Life within His universe. 

‘‘As nine months go to the shaping an infant 
ripe for his birth, 

So many a million of ages have gone to the 
making of a man.” 

In the very heart of every religion, interwoven 
into its warp and woof, is the idea of evolution. For 
what is religion but the knowledge of God, of the Self, 
and this knowledge is reached through evolution. ‘ What 
religion a man holds, to what race he belongs—these things 
are not important; the really important thing is this 
knowledge—the knowledge of God’s plan for men. For 
God has a plan, and that plan is evolution.” 

Q. What do you mean by a root-race and a sub-race ? 


336 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Ans. Root-races are gigantic divisions of humanity as 
the Lemurian, the Atlantean and the Aryan races, while 
sub-races are divisions of these, but still consisting of very 
large bodies of men. Sub-races in turn are divided into 
nations, and what are called branch-races. 

In the history of a globe there are recurring 
cycles or successions of events—the shadows in our 
lower world of events on higher planes—which follow 
one another in a definite order, manifesting principles 
rather than details, and which are repeated in the 
course of history on larger or smaller scales. Each recur- 
ring cycle is the shaping and evolution of a new human 
type, embodying as its dominant characteristic one of the 
seven stages of consciousness of our humanity: 1—3. 
Vitality embodying itself in etheric and dense matter, the 
triple embryonic and birth stages; 4. the passional rising 
to the emotiona] (Kamic) ; 5. the mental (Manasic) ; 6. the 
purely rational (Buddhic) ; 7. the spiritual (Atmic). The 
embodiment of each of these stages is called a root-race, 
and there are seven such in the life of a globe. Our physi- 
cal bodies show out two subdivisions, dense and etheric. 
The first two races evolved these and were not yet 
definitely physical, while the third built the human form, 
with lower astral and germinal mental, by its middle stage. 
All that we read in books upon ethnology refers to the 
development of the Atlantean and the Aryan, the fourth 
and fifth root-races ; but there was another which preceded 
the Atlantean race and to which the name of Lemurian 
has been given. This third root-race was concerned with 
the development of the physical body. The Atlantean race 
which succeeded it was concerned with the development 
of the astral or emotional body. The great Aryan race to 
which the majority of the population of Europe, India and 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 337 


America belong, is concerned principally with the mental 
body—what we call the mind. 

A root-race thus is a great type according to which 
the foremost peoples of the world are evolving. Within each 
root-race there are seven subdivisions or sub-races, each 
one of which represents in an incomplete and imperfect 
manner the characteristics which the corresponding root- 
race is to show in their perfection. The ultimate object of 
human evolution being the production of the perfect—all- 
round—man, that evolution goes on in this regular way: a 
race embodies the germs of several special qualities, while 
a sub-race develops specially one of these, dominating the 
other qualities, which are necessary in the man, separated 
for that purpose. Thus all root-races and sub-races are 
needed, and every one of them has its place in the ultimate 
perfect humanity which shall evolve on our globe. 

Each of these great races predominates in the world 
for millions of years; but they run concurrently to the 
extent that one begins before the other has finished ; so 
that although the Aryan race now rules nearly all the 
world, there are still vast numbers who clearly belong to 
the Atlantean race, and some few—the most backward of 
savages—who retain strong traces of Lemurian blood. The 
fifth or Aryan root-race as a whole, although it has existed 
in the world for sixty thousand years, is still not in its 
prime, and has a long time to run yet, probably a 
million years or so. 

The beginning of a coming root-race is in the sub- 
race of its own number in the reigning race. Thus the 
fifth root-race grew out of the fifth sub-race of the fourth 
root-race, and the sixth root-race will grow out of the 
sixth sub-race of the fifth root-race. We are standing now 


in the primary stage of such a cycle recurring for the 
43 


338 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


sixth time. The third root-race, the Lemurian, and the 
fourth, the Atlantean, are far behind us, and the small 
cycle of the sixth sub-race, of the fifth or Aryan root-race, 
from which (sub-race) the sixth root-race is to arise, is 
already in the early stages of its growth in Australia, 
New Zealand and the United States of America. 

We who are now human beings in this chain of 
globes ought all of us to become perfect, and to attain 
Adeptship and pass away from this scheme of evolution 
altogether by one of the seven paths which open out before 
the Adept, as explained in Chapter X, while what is now 
our animal kingdom ought by the end of this chain to 
attain individualisation, and therefore to be ready to 
furnish the humanity for the next chain, the fifth of our 
earth-scheme. 

QO. What do you mean by a ‘Chain of globes, and a 
“ Scheme of evolution’ ? 

Ans. Our solar system at the present moment contains 
ten chains, each consisting of seven globes, and these are 
all evolving side by side, though at different stages. A 
scheme of evolution is taking place upon each of these ten 
chains, and in the course of each scheme its chain of globes 
goes through seven incarnations. The globes of each chain 
present us with a small cycle of evolution descending 
into denser matter and then ascending out of it, and in an 
exactly analogous manner the successive incarnations of a 
chain also descend into denser matter and then ascend out 
of it. Our own chain is at the present moment at its 
lowest level of materiality, so that of its seven planets or 
globes three are on the physical plane, two on the astral 
and two on the lower mental. The wave of Divine Life 
passes in succession from globe to globe of this chain, 
beginning with one of the highest, descending gradually to 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 339 


the lowest and then climbing again to the same level as that 
at which it began. 

We may, for convenience of reference, label the 
seven globes by the earlier letters of the alphabet, and 
number the incarnations in order. Thus, as this is the 
fourth incarnation of our chain, the first globe in this 
incarnation will be 4A, the second 4B, the third 4C, the 
fourth (which is our earth) 4D, and so on. 

As the number of globes on any plane which a chain 
has at any given time depends upon the stage of its evolu- 
tion, these globes are not all composed of physical matter. 
4A contains no matter lower than that of the mental world ; 
it has its counterpart in all the worlds higher than that, 
but nothing below it. 4B exists in the astral world ; but 
4C is a physical globe and is in fact the planet which we 
know as Mars. Globe D is our own Earth, on which the 
life-wave of the chain is at present in action. Globe E is 
the planet which we call Mercury—also in the physical 
world. Globe F isin the astral world, corresponding on 
the ascending arc to globe 4B in the descent, while globe 
4G corresponds to globe 4A in having its lowest manifes- 
tation in the lower part of the mental world. Thus we 
have a scheme of globes starting in the lower mental world, 
dipping through the astral into the physical, and then 
rising into the lower mental through the astral again. 

Such is the condition of affairs in the fourth incar- 
nation. But just as the succession of the globes in a chain 
constitutes a descent into matter and an ascent from it 
again, so do the successive incarnations of a chain; 
and therefore the third incarnation commences not on the 
lower level of the mental world, but on the higher. 
Globes 3A and 3G are both of higher mental matter, 
globes 3B and 3F of the lower mental, and globes 3C 


34o THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


and 3E of the astral, while only globe 3D is visible in the 
physical world. The corpse of this physical globe 3D, 
of the third incarnation—now long past—of our chain is 
still visible to us in the shape of that dead planet the 
Moon, whence that third incarnation is usually called 
the lunar chain. 

The fifth incarnation of our chain which still lies very 
far in the future, will correspond to the third, though, 
of course, the planet 5D which will be in the physical 
world is not yet in existence. The other incarnations of 
the chain follow the same general rule of decreasing 
materiality. 

Of the ten chains of our solar system, each existing 
with a scheme of evolution of its own, seven are represented 
upon the physical plane by one or more globes, but the 
three others exist only on higher planes. These seven 
are'!: 1—that of an unrecognised planet Vulcan, very 
near the sun, which is in its third incarnation and so has 
only that one visible globe; (the existence of Vulcan 
was accepted by some astronomers a century ago ; but as 
it cannot now be found, the scientific men of the present 
day hold that the earlier observations were incorrect ; 
in fact, it is said by some occultists that Vulcan is in its 
sixth incarnation ;) 2—that of Venus which is in its fifth 
incarnation, and has therefore only one visible planet; 3 
—that of the Earth, Mars and Mercury, which has three 
visible planets because it is in its fourth incarnation; 
(a great bulk of the human race has passed through a 
series of incarnations on the planet Mars, and when our 
present occupancy of the earth ends for a time we shall 
all pass on to the somewhat less material life of the planet 
Mercury ;) 4—that of Jupiter, 5—that of Saturn, 6— 
that of Uranus, all in their third incarnation ; and 7— 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 341 


that of Neptune and the two unnamed planets beyond 
its orbit, which is in its fourth incarnation, and therefore 
has three physical planets like our terrene chain. 

In each incarnation of a chain (commonly called a 
chain-period) the wave of Divine Life moves seven times 
round the chain of seven planets, and each such movement 
is spoken of as a round. The time that the life-wave 
stays upon each planet is known as a world-period, and in 
the course of a world-period there are seven great root- 
races, divided into sub-races and the latter again subdivided 
into branch-races, as explained before. For convenience 
of reference this is stated in a tabular form, thus: 


7 Branch-races make 1 Sub-race 

7 Sub-races we 1 Root-race 

7 Root-races - 1 World-period 

7 World-periods 55 1 Round 

7 Rounds a 1 Chain-period, or In- 
carnation of a 
chain. 

7 Chain-periods x 1 Scheme of Evolu- 
tion, or Planetary 
Scheme. 

10 Schemes of Evolution ,, Our Solar System 


The fourth root-race of the fourth globe of the fourth 
round of a fourth chain-period would be the central 
point of a whole scheme of evolution, and we are at the 
present moment only a little past that point. The 
Aryan race, to which the majority of us belong, is the 
fifth root-race of the fourth globe, so that the actual 
middle point fell in the time of the last great root-race, 
the Atlantean. Consequently the human race as a whole 
is very little more than half-way through its evolution, 
and those few souls who are already nearing Adeptship 
(see Chapter X), which is the end and crown of this 
evolution, are very far in advance of their fellows. 


342 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Q. Now what are the first stages of the unfolding 
consciousness in man from the early beginnings ? 

Ans. In the stage of the savage the consciousness of 
“TI” and “Not I” slowly establishes itself within him, 
‘Not I” touches him, and he feels it; “ Not I” gives 
him pleasure or pain, and he knows or experiences it. 
Thus commences intelligence, and a root of self-conscious- 
ness begins to develop; a centre is formed to which 
everything goes in and from which everything comes out. 
After that an object is recognised as having given pleasure 
before, and a repetition of the pleasure is expected. That 
expectation is the dawn of memory and the beginning of 
imagination, the memory causing an outflow of desire to 
have that object and go forth in search of it. 

An animal goes in search of food only when goaded 
by a feeling of hunger, but with the gratification of the 
desire he again becomes quiescent. The pull comes from 
outside. The savage was long in that animal stage, but 
now ihaving memory of the pleasure, he desires that 
pleasure and goes in search of it, and his consciousness is 
thereby stimulated to activity by motion initiated from 
within instead of from without. Thus the gratification of 
desire is the law of his progress and evolution in the early 
stages. For him there is no morality, no distinction be- 
tween right and wrong. Experience is the law of life. He 
cannot discriminate between right and wrong unless there 
be experience of both good and evil. Patanjali aptly terms 
the mind in this stage the ‘ butterfly mind,’ darting from 
flower to flower with no stable purpose. But later the 
man finds out that he lives in a world of Law, getting 
pleasure when the Law is followed and pain when the 
Law is disregarded ; and thus with experiences of pleasure 
and pain he develops discrimination. 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 343 


Then also come Teachers to help his evolution and 
tell him of the existence of the Law—what is right, what 
wrong, or, in other words, what is wise as being with the 
stream of evolution and what unwise as being against it. 
When he disregards the teaching, penalty follows and he 
suffers, as he was told by the Teacher. Thus the memory 
of a command proved by experience makes a great 
impression on his consciousness, and by the declaration of 
the fundamental principles of morality his intelligence is 
immensely stimulated. When he does not obey the 
declared Law, he is left to the hard teaching of experi- 
ence and pain, and the lesson he would not learn from 
the lips of love is taught him by the whip of suffering 
till the desire for evil things is rooted out of his nature. 

After this preliminary training, the great law of 
orderly evolution in later human growth is the law of the 
four successive steps which take a man to the end of his 
journey for this age or dispensation, and make him more 
than man. 

Q. What ts that law of the four successive steps for 
orderly evolution in the later growth of humanity ? 

Ans. That law comes into operation in every nation 
after a certain stage of evolution has been reached, but it 
was proclaimed in ancient India as a definite law of 
evolving life, as the underlying principle by which every 
one may understand and follow his Dharma—Dharma 
being the inner nature of a man at the point he has 
reached and the law of his growth for the next stage. 

The first Dharma or duty is that of service, and no 
matter in which land a soul may be born, after the early 
Stages the inner nature demands the discipline of service 
to acquire the qualities needed for the next stage. There 
is a tendency in such souls, called Shudras, to yield to 


344 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


outside impulse without a developed judgment. It is the 
stage of confusion, of illusion, the “ confused mind ” of 
Patanjali. To this class belongs the serving type, the 
Shudra, and the law of his growth is obedience, devotion, 
fidelity. With little judgment of his own, his Dharma is 
blindly to obey the one he serves, like a soldier under the 
command of his superior, and he is not expected to show 
higher virtues. 

Having learnt the lesson of obedience and fidelity 
in many lives, he approaches the next stage, that of the 
Vaishya or the old type of merchant, where the Dharma 
or duty is to take up an occupation and acquire wealth, 
thereby evolving the characteristics of just dealing, keen- 
ness, shrewdness, fair payment in fair exchange, frugality, 
etc. Liberality will be the law of further growth for the 
Vaishya, but not the liberality of carelessness or overpay- 
ment. He gathers wealth with energy and shrewdness 
and spends it with careful discrimination and liberality on 
noble objects and schemes for public good. 

The third stage is that of the Kshattriya, or the 
ruler and the warrior, where the inner nature is combative 
and aggressive, ready to protect every one in the enjoyment 
of his right. His strength is the barrier between the 
oppressor and the oppressed, and right for him is the 
following of war and the struggle in the jungle with the 
wild beast. He develops courage, fearlessness, endurance, 
splendid generosity, devotion to an ideal, loyalty to 2 
cause, throwing away of life in defence of the weak and 
in the performance of duty. During this stage when the 
outer vehicles are plunged into bloodshed, mutilation and 
death, the inner life is learning that there is something 
greater and nobler than the physical body and the physi- 
cal existence. The man learns to sacrifice himself for an 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 345 


ideal, recognising the service of an ideal as evolving the 
real life, and the body as a garment to be thrown aside 
at the call of duty. 

Then comes the last stage, that of the Brahmana, 
whose Dharma or duty it is to teach. The soul must 
have assimilated all the lower experiences before he can 
teach, and if he had not obtained wisdom through 
obedience, exertion and combat, through the three 
previous stages, how could he teach his more ignorant 
brethren? The hero or the martyr of former lives becomes 
now the Saint, the Seer, with worldly things detached 
from him. The law of his growth is knowledge, piety, 
forgiveness, gentleness, being the friend of every creature ; 
while self-sacrifice is the fundamental law of his life, because 
though the struggle for existence is the law of evolution for 
the brute, the law of intelligent self-sacrifice is the law of evo- 
lution for man. His emotions will be pure and lofty, and his 
intellect well-trained with the mind steady and controlled. 
His moral nature will be noble and strong, and side by side 
with purity and mental strength for himself he will have 
a tender sympathy for others, and though himself beyond 
the power of suffering, will be able to enter fully into the 
pain of another by the remembrance of his own past. 
He will be able to control all his bodies and function on 
the higher planes and will give himself in joyfullest 
self-surrender to be a channel of the life of the Logos. 
With such perfection the end of his growth is liberation. 
He stands on the threshold of superhuman progress by the 
side of the lofty Beings, the Adepts, reaches the goal of 
humanity and becomes the Perfect Man. He has thus 
mounted the Ladder of Lives to the top-rung of human 
perfection, though many rungs lie still above with another 
and more splendid evolution opening out before Him. 

44 


346 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


QO. You have traced the broad outline of human evolu- 
tion; but will you explain why man, divine in his origin, 
could not have remained pure and untouched by evil all 
through that process of evolution ? Since God its good, 
why is there imperfection or evil in what He has produced ? 
In short, what ts the origin of evil and what ts tts use ? 

Ans. The One Existence—Brahman—is absolute and 
undivided; the One without a Second is absolute unity, 
absolute identity, without multiplicity or diversity, without 
conditions or limitation. But no manifestation can occur, 
no multiplicity can become, unless there be limitation. 
The very moment the universe comes into being, there 
must come in conditions, there must be limitation. Limita- 
tion is, in fact, a condition of manifestation, for the very 
moment we arrive at the point of manifestation, a circum- 
ference must be drawn from the central point, the circle of 
@ universe; without that, thought is lost in the absolute 
oneness, the identity. Within that circle thought may be 
exercised, and the very word ‘manifestation’ implies at 
once this limitation. When that is understood, the next 
Step is simple. Having diversity, having limitation, there 
is at once imperfection implied. The perfect is unlimited, 
the limited imperfect. Thus imperfection must be the 
result of limitation. In the totality there is perfection ; in 
the whole, but not in the parts. The very moment there 
is multiplicity, variety of bodies, each body separately 
considered is imperfect, because it is less than the whole, 
and only the whole can have perfection predicated of it. 
Thus manifestation implying limitation, and imperfection 
being the result of limitation, imperfection is co-eternal 
with the universe. Imperfection, in short, is a necessary 
condition of limitation, so that whenever there comes 4 
universe into existence, imperfection comes into existence 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 347 


at the same time. The fact of manifestation is thus the 
origin of imperfection, of what is called evil. 

Although the essence of imperfection is in the very 
existence of the universe, that which we call evil is its 
imperfection in its relation to the rest rather than the 
necessary imperfection of separated bodies. But in the 
very words ‘good and evil’ relativity is fundamentally 
implied, the ‘ pairs of opposites’ necessary to thought; the 
word ‘good’ cannot fairly be predicated of anything until 
the idea of evil is recognised—the ‘ not-good ’; good and 
evil are correlative terms, and the one can only be dis- 
tinguished as being the opposite of the other—like light 
and darkness—which is implicitly present in the mind at 
the same time. In fact, evil does not exist in and by itself, 
does not reside in the things, but like good, lies in the 
relationship between one thing and another; it is relative, 
not absolute. What we speak of as evil in one place may 
not be evil in another; for evolution implies this changing 
character, and what is good at one stage may be evil at 
another. 

When a man begins to understand what evolution 
means, he regards as ‘ good’ all that is working in harmony 
with the Great Law, and calls ‘evil’ all that is working 
against it—all the tendencies which persist from the 
Stage of evolution in which greater diversity was sought. 
‘Good’ might therefore be defined as that which 
helps man forward in his evolution, ‘ evil’ as that which 
hinders him. Therefore qualities now regarded as evil— 
avarice, desire for material gain, etc.—were good 
during the descent of the outward-going life into matter, 
or involution, as only by these could diversity be obtained, 
whereas now they are evil as retarding the process of 
integration, as checking the inward-flowing tide of life 


348 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


towards the pole of Spirit. Again, man having evolved to 
a stage at which the infliction of pain on others is against 
his evolution towards the Divine Love, we call that inflic- 
tion of paina ‘crime’. Also, selfishness which was neces- 
sary at one time for the development of individualism is 
now evil, because the selfish man is acting against the Law 
of Love and is reverting to a previous stage in evolution 
which he ought to have outgrown. In fact, selfishness is 
like the scaffolding which was useful when the building was 
under construction, but which is not only useless but even 
a hindrance after the completion of the building. Thus 
good and evil are purely relative terms, and we realise that 
that which is good at an earlier stage, is evil at a later 
one, and that conversely, that which is good at a later 
stage is undesirable at an earlier one, when man could not 
appreciate it and so could not be helped forward by it. 
This retarding force of evil subserves many 
purposes. The life that is in us cannot manifest its higher 
capacities unless we are placed under conditions in which 
we have to struggle against opposition. Evil is, as it were, 
the weight opposing the muscle, and as we develop the 
body by struggling against the opposing external weight, 
so do we develop the moral character by struggling against 
evil which is the opposite of every virtue. Every virtue 
has its opposite evil. Truth and falsehood, courage and 
cowardice, compassion and hatred, humility and pride, 
are pairs of opposites. We can develop truth only by 
struggling against the false, by realising that in the world 
around us there is falsehood on every side of us ; and only 
by our efforts against it can we purify our nature from 
falsity and render true the life which we are developing. 
So also with every other virtue, with good in its totality. 
Courage is developed in the presence, not in the absence, 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 349 


of an object which we fear. If there were no objects 
which give rise to the sensation of fear, then courage could 
never be evolved. Thus man could never develop strength 
to hold to the good, unless he gained it through conflict 
with evil. 

Another fundamental use of evil is the evolution of 
the power to discriminate between good and evil, and thus 
of volition or choice. There could be no knowledge of 
good without the experience of evil, just as we should have 
no knowledge of light unless we at times experience dark- 
ness. There are these pairs of opposites throughout nature, 
and neither of the two opposing terms of a pair could 
exist without the other. We can distinguish Truth only 
by discerning it as different from that which is not true, 
and can learn its value only by finding from experience 
the destructive effects of falsehood, in man and in 
society. Thus, only by recognition of evil can we know 
good, and to recognise evil, experience of evil 1s necessary. 

Useful also is evil as a scourge which drives us 
to good. For as evil is discordance with the evolving 
forces of the Divine Life in manifestation, it must result 
in pain. Hence evil inevitably brings suffering as a result, 
not by an arbitrary penalty but by an inherent necessity. 
Suffering in its turn gives rise to a feeling of repulsion 
towards the cause of suffering and drives man away from 
evil and towards good. 

‘This being so, we should look with understanding 
and absolute charity on all forms of evil which surround 
us. If we see a human soul struggling in corruption and 
evil, we should feel no anger, intolerance or hatred, but 
Should remember that, just because of the evil with which 
the soul is struggling, he will gradually gain strengch 
enough to conquer it and at last become triumphant. 


350 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


By making this a habitual attitude we shall come to 
realise that the Divine is in everything, in good and 
in evil alike; that as the Bhagavad-Gita says, the Lord 
is the gambling of the cheat as well as the truth of 
the truthful. 

Q. You say that evil inevitably results in pain. What, 
then, ts the meaning of patn, and what ts tts use ? 

Ans. The spiritual Self or the Monad—Offspring of the 
universal consciousness—is conscious on his own plane from 
the very beginning; but as he clothes himself in body after 
body of matter—the mental, the astral and the physical 
body—he becomes blinded by the veil of matter. Now 
it is this blinded self that comes into the manifested 
universe for the sake of learning and of gathering 
experience. He is drawn to all sorts of external objects. 
Some of these give him the sensation of pleasure and he 
is attracted; others the sensation of pain and he is 
repelled. This happens again and again until he finds 
that indiscriminate gratification of desire—over-eating 
or over-drinking, for example—is always followed by 
suffering, and when that experience has been repeated 
over and over again, this Spirit, which as mind is able to 
think, connects the gratification of the desire with the 
pain which follows on that gratification, and in this way 
gradually comes to understand, through repeated im- 
pressions on the infant mind, that there are laws in the 
universe connected with his physical body, and that 
when coming into contact with those laws he tries to 
violate them, suffering is the result. Thus with one 
object of desire after another this lesson is learnt, until an 
accumulated mass of experience is gradually gained by 
the Spirit, and he learns by pain to regulate his desires, 20 
jonger letting the horses of the senses gallop sDiiersaver 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 351 


they will, but curbing and reining them in, and permit- 
ting them only to go along the roads that are really 
desirable. 

And so gradually by this process of education 
the knowledge of Law in the external world grows up, 
whereby the meaning of pain is seen to be hostile contact 
with Law, the effort to break a law that never can succeed 
—a law which will prove its existence by the suffering that 
is caused when the Spirit tries to fling himself against that 
barrier. Thus the first use of pain is the gain, through it, 
of the knowledge of Laws, and the consequent guiding and 
education of the lower nature by the reasoning intelligence. 

A second use of pain is the gradual extirpation of 
desire. As we have seen, it is desire which draws the soul 
outwards to the external, and the education of the soul 
consists in this passing out into the external, gathering 
knowledge, and then by experience losing all taste for the 
external and carrying inwards the knowledge so obtained. 
But if the objects of desire remained desirable, there would 
be no end to the revolution of the wheel of births and 
deaths, no garnering of knowledge, and no real evolution 
of the higher possibilities. It is necessary, therefore, that 
the manifesting soul shall not only gather knowledge, but 
Shall also carry it back with him and make it part of his 
own future being; and in order that this may be done, 
desire must gradually change its nature until at last it 
vanishes away. In the beginning, every desire, as the 
soul gratifies it, intensifies the pleasure; so he gratifies it 
again and again. But after a while he finds that the 
pleasure is transitory, for he cannot always be with the 
Object of his desire, and separation from it brings pain. 
Further, the objects of desire are themselves transitory, 
and a time comes when they are taken away from him, 


352 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


apparently for ever, and the pain is greater than before. 
Then again, even if they remain with him to the end of his 
life, he finds he cannot take them with him at his death, 
and again there is pain. Thus he learns to avoid those 
objects of desire which are found to be transitory, and to 
fix his desire on those which he believes to be permanent. 
But these, again, he finds to be only relatively permanent, 
and after a while they also pass from him and he suffers. 
Thus one after another the objects of the lowest external 
world, of each phase of the external world—subtle or 
physical—become undesirable to the soul that has gained 
knowledge; everything becomes undesirable save the 
Eternal, which is the essence of the soul himself: and so 
gradually the soul learns, by pain in the physical universe, 
to get rid of desire. 

There is no other way in which desire can be con- 
quered. The mere forcible abstaining from the gratifi- 
cation of desire is a very elementary stage of the progress 
of the soul. The very root of desire has to be cut off, and 
that can only be by the objects that once attracted losing 
their power of attraction, so that they no longer can draw 
the soul outwards ; then the soul having exhausted every- 
thing that he can learn from the object, and having found 
it productive of pain in the end, no longer finds it desirable, 
but casts it aside, and, like a bee visiting the flower for 
honey, carries away the knowledge he has gained. And 
unless he can get rid of desire for the things of the 
physical world, he can never feel the inner drawing, first 
to the things of the mind, and then to those of the higher 
life, which is the very object of the soul’s evolution. 

The next lesson to be learnt through pain is the tran- 
sitory nature of all that is not of the essence of the Spirit 
himself. There is no other possible means by which the soul 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 353 


can learn this lesson and be led from the unreal to the Real, 
from darkness to Light, from death to Immortality. By 
disease and misery, by poverty and grief, he learns that 
everything which surrounds him—not only in the physical, 
but also in the region of desire and in the region of the 
mind itself—is transitory, and that in the changing 
he who is changeless may never find rest. In the early 
stage he finds that every form of suffering springs 
originally from the desire for some impermanent object, 
and ceases to give pain as soon as the desire is trans- 
ferred to a higher object. So at first he turns from the 
sensuous to the intellectual, from the transient to the 
relatively permanent, and learns to cultivate the mind 
and the intelligence and the artistic side of his nature, 
instead of seeking the gratification of the senses which he 
has in common with the lower forms of animal life. 
Even here is a great gain. For the things of sense are 
limited, and men fight the one with the other in order to 
get their share of the limited quantity; but the things 
of the higher nature are practically unlimited, and no 
man is the poorer because his brother is richly gifted 
artistically or intellectually. In the region of intellect 
and of the higher tastes and emotions, all may share 
what they have, and find themselves, after the sharing, 
the richer and not the poorer for the giving. And so 
humanity progresses from competition to co-operation and 
learns the lesson of Brotherhood. 

But even then it is found that satisfaction does not 
lie that way, for though a step upward, this drawing away 
of desire from the body to the mind, from the senses to 
the internal organ, from sensations to ideas and images, 
is still of the nature of desire. And by seeking grati- 


fication of desire, one never finds happiness, for every 
45 


354 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


desire that is gratified gives birth to a new desire; and 
happiness does not lie in having more of the things 
one already possesses, nor in the increasing grati- 
fication of desires, but rather in the transmuting of the 
desire for the transitory into the aspiration for the 
Eternal, and the complete changing of the nature from 
that which seeks to enjoy to that which seeks to give. 
And thus after a while, by this absence of satisfaction, 
which is pain, the realisation comes to the soul that this 
is not the road, and he grows weary of the change. All 
the outer objects of body and of mind lose their attractive 
force. He went outward to the senses and failed; then 
he withdrew into the mind, but the mind is outward 
from the standpoint of the Spirit, and again he failed. 
Always beaten back by pain and by the dissatisfaction 
that is the most wearisome pain of all, he finally learns 
his lesson, and from that which is without he turns to 
that which is within, treads the path which leads out of 
desire to the realisation of the Self, and finds the 
beginning of peace, the first touch of the real, of essential 
satisfaction. 

Another use of pain is of a more inner character, 
for here pain can be used as an instrument to destroy 
personality. The soul has not yet got outside the 
reach of pain, for he is still seeking and has not quite 
found his centre. Although he knows that he is not the 
body, nor the senses, nor the mind, he still finds himself 
susceptible to pain that comes from within, of contacts 
that translate themselves as pain. And coming into 
contact with others—with the thoughts, feelings and 
judgments of others—he constantly finds himself pained by 
misjudgments and misrepresentations, by unkind thoughts 
and unkind feelings; and having by this time gained 


THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 355 


wisdom he asks himself: “‘ Why do I still feel pain ? What 
is there, not in the outside, but in me that gives rise to 
pain?” For he realises that nothing can touch him save 
himself, and that if he feels pain, it is a sign of imper- 
fection, that he is not withdrawn wholly from the lower 
nature which is not himself. And then he begins to use 
pain instead of merely feeling it; he is no longer at the 
mercy of pain, but takes pain into his own hands as an 
instrument and uses it for his own purpose; when he finds 
this pain coming from unkind action, or from misjudgment 
of motive or of conduct, the soul takes the pain in hand as 
a sculptor might take a chisel, and with this instrument of 
pain he strikes at his own personality and cuts off his 
personal weakness, for he knows that if it were not for this 
personality which is selfish, he would not feel the pain at 
all, but would remain serene and untroubled amid the 
conflicts of the world. 

And pain has still another use. The soul that means 
to be strong, not for himself, but for the helping of the 
world—the soul that knows that he can only learn to live 
for others if he is strong in himself—now deliberately chooses 
pain, because only thus can he learn endurance and pa- 
tience. Those who never suffer always remain weak, and 
only in the stress and agony of combat does the soul 
learn to endure; and the strength gradually working in 
the soul, that which once was anxiety and struggle becomes 
the calm serenity of perfect strength. 

And for one other thing will the soul choose pain— 
that he may learn sympathy. For even the strong soul 
would be useless if he had not learnt sympathy. Nay, the 
Strong soul might become rather dangerous if he became 
Strong without compassion and learnt to gather force 
without learning to guide that force aright. So the 


356 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


stronger he is, the more eagerly will he seek this lesson of 
pain, in order that by feeling pain he may learn to feel 
for others, and that by his own pain he may learn how 
the pains of the world shall be healed. 

Thus all kinds of pain that a soul has in his im- 
perfection are, as it were, the stones with which the temple 
of the perfect Spirit is finally built. Pain in the end there 
will not be, though pain in the building there must be. 
But as the Spirit goes onward and grows freer, peace 
takes the place of struggle, and joy takes the place of 
pain. Moreover, pain lies merely in the sheaths in which 
the Spirit is clothed and not in his essential nature. The 
Spirit is bliss, not sorrow; he is joy, not pain. And pain 
is passing, bliss is eternal ; for bliss is the inner essence of 
Brahman, the Self of all. ‘“ Of bliss are all things born ”’ ; 
says the Upanishad, “ in bliss they live, and to bliss they 
return.” 


CHAPTER IX 
BROTHERHOOD 


Question. Why is Brotherhood of Humanity made the 
one obligatory object of the Theosophical Society, the 
single “ article of belief” binding on all the members ? 

Answer. The recognition of this principle of brother- 
hood intellectually and the endeavours to live it practically 
are very stimulative to the higher nature of man. To live 
it even to a small extent cleanses the heart and purifies the 
vision; to live it perfectly is to eradicate all sense of 
separateness. That recognition is the first step towards 
the realisation of non-separateness which is so necessary 
for the progress of a disciple, making him sensitive to the 
sorrows of all and training him in self-identification with 
the whole of humanity, in order that he may at last become 
a definite co-worker with God, with his entire nature dedi- 
cated to His purposes. 

Q. But how can you establish the brotherhood of 
humanity ? Looking around, st does not appear as if men 
were brothers, for we find them all ready to fly at one 
another’s throats. 

Ans. The brotherhood of man is not something which 
needs to be established. Brotherhood ¢s: it is a fact 
in nature. It already exists and requires merely to be 
realised. No one can make a simpler or more perfect 


358 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


declaration of it than the Christ, when He said: ‘ One is 
your Father, even God, and all ye are brethren.”’ 

People deceive and kill one another, because they 
forget the truth of brotherhood, but men’s ignorance does 
not change the laws of nature nor vary her irresistible 
march. Her laws crush those who oppose them. No 
nation can endure, no civilisation can last, that outrages 
brotherhood, and we have to attune our lives in harmony 
with that law. 

Q. What ts the basis of the brotherhood of man, and 
why do we not realise it though recognising tt intellec- 
tually 7? 

Ans. Human life is a portion of that one Father-life 
whereof we all are offspring. Sharers in one life, all form 
one brotherhood, the solidarity of man being one of the 
basic truths of Theosophy as already explained in 
Chapter I. 

The intellect is a separative principle, spontaneously 
combative and self-assertive, its very nature being to assert 
itself as separate from others ; and not on the lower planes 
with their sense of separateness and a conflict of interests 
can brotherhood be realised. 

Q. Where then can brotherhood be fully realised ? 

Ans. Not on the lower planes, not even on the intel- 
lectual, but on the spiritual planes, the Atmic and the 
Buddhic, can this brotherhood be fully realised as it has its 
foundation only there. 

The self in man being a ray of the universal Self, 
Unity resides in that Self, and that unity is felt with perfect 
sympathy once the Buddhic plane is attained. When once 
a man becomes conscious on that plane at a certain stage 
of his pilgrimage, called the First Initiation, as explained in 
Chapter X, he actually realises the union of all living 


BROTHERHOOD 359 


beings; nay, of all things, for everything has the same 
Divine Life within it. He then knows what he had hitherto 
only believed, and sees all things as himself and feels that 
all he has is as much theirs as his, nay, more theirs than 
his, as their strength being less, their need is greater than 
his; and so Those whom we call the Masters, but who love 
better the name of Elder Brothers, have ever been marked 
by Their outwelling compassion and tenderness, using 
Their power to protect Their younger brethren, Their 
wisdom to guide them, Their strength to sustain them. 
That is the ideal, the perfect Brotherhood where Brother 
means a Servant of mankind. 

Q. Does not brotherhood imply equality ? If not, how 
can there be brotherhood with inequalities all round 
among men ? 

Ans. We know the motto of the French Revolution, 
“Liberty, Equality, Fraternity,” where it is taken for 
granted that Liberty and Fraternity imply Equality. Now 
what is Equality? If it be thereby meant that all men are 
equal in their origin and that every one, born of the divine 
nature, will, after having unfolded potentiality into power, 
ultimately reach the manifested Divinity, then in that sense 
Equality is true. But in the course of evolution, in the 
Jong changing struggle between spirit and matter, inequali- 
ties will arise; while in Spirit all men are equal, in the 
flesh they are radically unequal. 

Where is the equality between a man of genius and 
a fool, between a cripple and an athlete, between a saint 
and a savage? Except in the rare instances of twins and 
triplets, brotherhood implies a difference in age of physical 
bodies and, consequently, differences in strength, in clever- 
ness, in capacity, in duty; and these differences, except 
that of age, are found even among twins and triplets. 


360 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Brotherhood implies a community of interest, all members 
of a family profiting if the family be rich, but the individual 
interests of brothers will be absolutely different. In a large 
family some brothers may be grown-up men working in 
the world, while others may be in the school-room, and 
others again in the nursery. But what interests has a boy 
of fourteen in common with his brother of four, and what 
cares the elder brother of twenty-four, fighting his way in 
the world, for all the prizes of school-life won by the second 
brother? Duty differs according to age, and every one 
striving to do his duty according to his state in life pro- 
motes the evolution of the human family as a whole. 

Q. Then is there no sort of equality in the make-up of 
soctety ? 

Ans. In the building-up of society, the most that can 
be asked—because the most that is possible—is that there 
shall be equality of rich and poor before the law, so that 
no man may, artificially, by a man-made law or custom, be 
placed at an unfair disadvantage. Again, as far as pos- 
sible, every man should be given equal opportunities, 
opportunities to develop every faculty he brings with him 
into the world, though it should be remembered that the 
radical inequality which no society and no human law can 
remove lies in the power to grasp an opportunity when it 
comes. 

Q. What, then, is your conception of brotherhood in 
the social system ? 

Ans. We should build a social system where social 
service may be demanded from every member according to 
his capacity and social help given to him according to his 
needs, every man thus having the opportunity of develop- 
ing every faculty he brings with him into the world. 
Thereby the brute law of struggle-for-existence will be 


BROTHERHOOD 361 


changed into the law of life—the social law of self-sacrifice 
for the quick evolution of humanity. As already stated, an 
Indian Master says: ‘“‘ The law of the survival of the fittest 
is the law of evolution for the brute, but the law of self- 
sacrifice is the law of evolution for man.” 

In the light of that high ideal we see that inequality 
of age means inequality of capacity and power and there- 
fore inequality of duty, and that the strong exist not for 
tyranny but for service, not for trampling the weak under 
foot but for protecting them with the tenderest compassion. 
To the spirit of brotherhood weakness is a claim for help 
and not an opportunity for oppression. Each age has its 
own duty, the younger to learn and serve, the older to 
direct and protect, all alike loving and helpful in the great 
family of humanity. 

Q. But why is there inequality in different people and 
in different nations ? 

Ans, The inequality between different people is due 
chiefly to the age of the soul and, consequently, the 
stage reached by the soul in evolution. Some started their 
journey much earlier than others, and thus having had 
a longer time than their younger brethren, have unfolded 
more powers. 

Nations are composed of souls mostly of a certain 
Stage of development, who are born together to acquire 
certain experiences according to their karma and the stage 
Teached by them in evolution. 

We do not despise a flower because it is not yet the 
fruit, nor despise a babe because it is not yet the man; we 
do not despise ourselves because we are not yet as Gods, 
and so we need not despise baby-souls who are not yet as 
much developed as we are. In the ladder of human life 


we occupy the middle rungs with the Elder Brothers at 
46 


362 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


the top and the younger souls at the bottom, and the very 
word ‘ brotherhood ’ connotes identity of blood and inequal- 
ity of development. Men shut themselves out from their 
brothers’ hearts by differences of caste, creed, class, clan, 
country or colour, but the wise man rising above all those 
external differences sees all as part of his family, as 
children of one Father, with identity of essential life. 
‘ Small souls enquire, ‘ Belongs this man 
To our own class, kith or clan ?’ 


But larger-hearted men embrace 
As brothers all the human race.” 


O. Is spiritual unity the only basis for the law of the 
Brotherhood of Humanity or do we find any indications 
of this law on the lower planes also ? 

Ans. First on the physical plane the particles of our 
dense bodies pass from one person to another, modified by 
the body in which they dwell for a time. We have seen 
in Chapter III that our dense bodies are made up of tiny 
lives or cells in a state of constant motion, which are 
continuously passing from us to the air outside and thence 
to other bodies, and are being replaced by cells from the 
bodies of others, and this constitutes a brotherhood of our 
physical bodies. 

Similarly, we have seen in Chapter VII on Thought- 
Power that many of our desires, emotions and thoughts 
come to us from the unseen vibrations radiating from 
other astral and mental bodies, and being modified for 
better or for worse by their passage through our vehicles, 
pass out again to affect others. 

Thus we are all along influencing other people in 
the three lower planes by what we are, by what we say 
and do, and by what we desire and think, and are in turn 
being influenced by them. Weare all inextricably linked 


BROTHERHOOD 363 


together, and no one can advance or recede without helping 
or hindering the progress of others, thus disclosing a true 
unity in humanity amidst all its apparent diversity. 

Q. But do we find this principle of brotherhood worked 
out in the ancient or the modern world ? 

Ans. The ancient ideal of Kingship was drawn from 
the perfect example of the Great White Brotherhood of 
liberated Spirits, the Masters, and from that recognition of 
the Elders during the childhood of the root-races of the 
world we come to the historical facts of Divine Dynasties 
and Divine Kings in Egypt, India and China, where the 
life of a king who knew that “ the tears of the weak under- 
mine the throne of kings,” was not the life of pleasure and 
enjoyment, but of service and sacrifice. Still by many 
of the great Empires of the later past, built on a founda- 
tion of selfishness, on a foundation of the misery of the 
masses of the people, Brotherhood was denied. And now 
these ancient Empires, Babylonia, Assyria, Egypt, Greece, 
Rome, have all passed away; only one contemporary 
nation, India, remains, because in her literature she 
taught the law of Brotherhood. But India ceased 
to live out that law in practice, and that marked the 
beginning of her decline in later times. 

Q. But did not ancient India by her system of castes 
preach and practise inequality rather than Brotherhood ? 

Ans. It has already been explained that Brotherhood 
does not imply equality. The old theory of castes was 
based on the law of Brotherhood, which recognised 
inequality in the age of the soul and the consequent 
inequality of development. It is on this truth that differ- 
ences among the various castes and classes of society rest, 
brothers of different ages in the human family having 
different duties, occupations and responsibilities. 


364 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


' The Shudra who serves, being a young and unde- 
veloped soul, was the younger child in the National house- 
hold, and there is no humiliation in being a younger child 
in a family. By the Vaishya, the merchant, the house- 
holder of the Nation, wealth was to be acquired, but in order 
to be dispensed for supporting the other Orders in the State 
and for worthy and noble causes. Charity is still ingrained 
in the Vaishya, though all that is wanted at present in 
that charity is to change its direction—to build schools and 
universities and to train the youth in religion and morality, 
instead of building lofty temples, of which there are already 
too many in the land, and which, owing to want of proper 
education, would perhaps be deserted by those youths 
when they grow up. Then came the Kshattriya, the 
warrior, with his right to splendour and enjoyment, but 
also with a duty to sacrifice everything—life, family, love 
—in protecting the people. Lastly came the Brahmana, 
the teacher, pure in conduct and ascetic in life, who was 
not to be wealthy save in wisdom. But now there is all 
‘ confusion in caste and the Brahmana is seldom a teacher. 
The Law of Brotherhood is denied to one-sixth of the 
population—the ‘untouchable,’ the sweeper and the 
sca venger—which is left in foulness and degradation. The 
Law of Brotherhood was the pivot of ancient Indian 
society in all her splendour, but her practical denial of that 
law for her outcaste population has brought on her the 
penalty of decay. 

We must realise the duty and the responsibility 
which lie upon us of improving both the surroundings and 
the characters of our younger brethren in the depressed 
classes by every means in our power. We should use our 
knowledge of the higher laws in their favour, thus enabling 
them to shorten their stay in this low stage of evolution. 


BROTHERHOOD 365 


By teaching their children the elements of right living, we 
draw out and cultivate the powers of the soul, while by 
checking and repressing the faults as they become manifest 
and improving their food and environments, we help them 
to build better bodies for the habitation of the more 
unfolded souls. This is the help we both can and ought 
to give to these our successors on the stage of the world, 
and small will be our claim to the help of the Greater Ones 
if we refuse our help to these little ones of the human race. 
We dare not plead to the Lords of Compassion to stoop 
to us and help us to rise, unless we, in our turn, stoop ta 
those below us and seek to raise them up. 

In London one-tenth of the population die in the 
work-house, the prison and the hospital, but England still 
tries to do her duty to her outcaste population by edu- 
cating them, by building houses for them and by giving 
them decent living and short hours of work. Justice being 
the divine law, India by making outcastes of her younger 
children is herself enslaved. 

Q. How does the recognition of this principle of 
brotherhood as a definite fact affect our attitude towards 
those around us ? 

Ans. With the recognition of brotherhood our attitude 
towards all around us changes radically and becomes a 
posture ever of helpfulness and deepest sympathy, for we 
See that the true interests of all are in fact identical and 
that nothing that clashes with their higher interest can be 
the right thing for us to do. 

We also naturally become filled with the widest 
possible tolerance and charity, because our philosophy 
Shows us that it matters little what a man believes so long 
as he is good and true, and because our wider knowledge 
enables us to make allowance for many things and to 


366 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


comprehend more of human nature, as we realise how the 
sin appeared to the sinner at the moment of its commission. 

We thus feel not only sympathy, but positive love, 
towards all mankind, and adopt an attitude of watchful 
helpfulness, as we feel that every contact with others is 
for us an opportunity to help or advise them with the 
additional knowledge acquired through our study. 

Q. How can we hasten the realisation of this brother- 
hood in physical life ? 

Ans. Though that realisation is fully attainable only on 
the Buddhic plane as explained before, we can hasten it on 
the physical plane by altruism. But we shall have to 
keep in mind that different brothers need different kinds of 
help owing to their inequality of development, and that 
it is of greater importance to help our brother to grow 
than to save him from some physical suffering. 

Extensive schemes of social reform are useful in 
their own way and also in educating public opinion by 
bringing vividly before the minds of men the suffering in 
which their less fortunate brothers are living, but greater 
good can be done by efforts to help persons individually. 
We should try to study each individual who wants help, 
find out his ideal, and showing him how to realise it put 
beforet him an ideal slightly higher. We can thus help 
him and accelerate his growth by showing him how he can 
help himself and by giving him our loving sympathy and 
encouragement. 

Q. What ts our duty as brothers to those above 4s, 
those on a@ level with us, and those below us in the great 
family of humanity 7? | 

Ans. We cannot know the measure of the burdens of 
our Elder Brethren as we are yet too weak and too igno- 
rant to understand Them; still we can make that burden 


BROTHERHOOD 367 


less and lighten some of the load by yielding to Them 
ready obedience, loving service and unfailing devotion 
until we become strong and wise enough to share con- 
sciously in Their glorious work. 

Towards our equals we should have an attitude of 
friendliness, implying trust and good faith, breaking down 
the barriers of pride, distrust and suspicion between 
strangers, and thus encouraging people of different nation- 
alities with help, sympathy and comradeship to get rid of 
prejudice and to see the good in other nations. 

As regards our younger brethren, ¢.g., savages, 
occupying less developed bodies than ourselves, we should 
show them justice and kindness when we come into contact 
with them; while as regards the lower classes in our own 
land, we should see that they do not starve, but earn enough 
money honestly to live a decent life. They should all be 
guided, helped and protected as they have a right to be on 
account of their younger soul-age. 

Q. Is there any special reason for emphastsing 
Brotherhood in the Theosophical Society ? 

Ans. It is important that all members should realise a 
Close fellowship, a feeling of real unity by forgetting their 
personal feelings and interests, as the heart of the society 
is making for itself a body on the Buddhic plane as a 
channel for the Great Masters of the Wisdom to work 
through. That channel is as yet imperfect, as each 
member thinks too much of himself individually and too 
little of the good of the whole. 

The two Masters connected with the founding of 
the Theosophical Society, Master Morya and Master 
Kuthumi, will shortly commence the work of starting the 
hew root-race and are looking for suitable assistants in 
Their work ; and only those devoted and earnest members, 


368 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


who recognise and realise a close fellowship and a feeling 
of real unity, can hope to have the privilege of being 
chosen to serve Them. 

Again, different nations require to be drawn together 
in brotherly feeling to prepare the way for the forthcom- 
ing advent of the World-Teacher—the Bodhisattva of the 
Buddhist, the Christ of the Christian, the Shri Krishna of 
the Hindu, the Lord Maitreya, the great spiritual Teacher 
whose teaching shall unify all religions. 

Q. Are we united only to the human family by ties of 
brotherhood 7? 

Ans. As explained in Chapter VIII on Evolution, 
there are six other kingdoms in nature, and we are closely 
linked with all of them. The life sustaining our physical 
bodies has passed through all these kingdoms and has there 
built up more and more evolved and complicated forms 
which have eventually developed into human bodies. Not 
only that, but we are dependent even now for our very exis- 
tence on the work of these lower kingdoms, especially of 
the vegetable and the animal kingdoms. 

Again, we share the Divine Life, not only with every 
human being, but with every animal, plant and stone, and 
even with every particle or atom in all kingdoms, with 
everything that is. The Divine Life is the spirit in every- 
thing that exists from the atom to the archangel, as ex- 
plained for ‘the Immanence of God’ in Chapter I, and 
thus the inner unity, the One Life dwelling equally in all, 
shows that there is not only a Brotherhood of Humanity, 
but an all-embracing fraternity, a universal brotherhood 
in nature. 

Professor Overstreet, while trying to show how 
the conception of God is gradually changing from that 
of an extra-cosmic judge to that of an immanent presence 


BROTHERHOOD 369 


—‘*the figure of myriad lives, and yet of one vast 
group-life, in ceaseless activity; ...a God, in short, 
that zs the world in the spiritual unity of its mass-life ’— 
says: “ The genetic sciences are everywhere convincing 
us that there is no fundamental break in continuity 
between the lower animals and man, that, as Forel states 
it: ‘All the properties of the human mind may be 
derived from the properties of the animal mind,’ and that 
therefore ‘the doctrine of evolution is quite as valid in the 
province of psychology as it is in all the other provinces 
of organic life’. There remain two great steps still to be 
taken. Below the animal is the plant; below the plant 
is the so-called inorganic . . . We have rid ourselves 
of the notion of a difference in kind between the human 
and the lower animal, we are increasingly doing so 
between the animal and the plant . . . The inorganic may 
be at or near the lower limit of variation . . . If this 
should prove to be true, then the inorganic is fundamental- 
ly the same in kind as the most advanced forms of life.”’ 

Q. How, then, can we help our younger brethren in the 
lower kingdoms ? 

Ans. Our lives are closely bound with the animal and 
the vegetable world, and so first we owe a fraternal duty 
to the vast animal kingdom which surrounds us. Our 
attitude towards our younger brethren should not be one 
of harshness, injustice and thoughtlessness or of cruelty for 
Self-amusement and personal gain, but that of protection 
and guardianship with gratitude for their service to us. 
They are brought in relation with us in order that we may 
do something in fostering the budding mentality. within 
them, as well as raise them to a higher level emotionally 
and thus quicken their individualisation. We should also 


refuse to share the sin of slaughter by eating meat or fish, 
47 


370 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


or by wearing articles obtained only by the slaughter of 
animals, like sealskin or feathers of birds. 

Nature-spirits or fairies and gnomes work out the 
wonderful forms ef the mineral and the vegetable world 
under the direction of the Great Builders of the Universe, 
and our duty to these kingdoms lies in thinking of those 
spirits with friendliness and in forbearing from thoughtlessly 
injuring their work. Moreover, plants and flowers have 
the beginning of an astral body with the power of feeling 
pleasure and pain, as explained in Chapter VIII, and we 
should carefully abstain from injuring those living things. 

We have a duty even towards lower forms of life 
than the mineral, z.e., the elemental essence which sur- 
rounds us everywhere and forms the three elemental king- 
doms. That essence progresses by means of the effect 
which we produce upon it by our thoughts, passions, emo- 
tions and feelings, and our duty towards those kingdoms 
will be fully discharged only if we carry out our higher 
ideals and see that our thoughts and emotions are of the 
highest possible type. 

Q. Finally, what is our individual duty as regards 
Brotherhood in general 7? 

Ans. We should realise that the very condition of the 
spiritual life is to see the same Self dwelling equally in all. 

As regards our younger brethren in the lower 
kingdoms, that duty has been already explained. 

In the human family we ought to remember that 
the Self dwells in the most degraded as well as in the 
purest. No obstacle should therefore be placed in the 
way of anyone attaining his highest growth, but facilities 
should be given to all to develop every faculty brought 
by them into the world. All are members of one family 
with different duties, and we should not despise or look 


BROTHERHOOD 372. 


down upon our fellow-workers, however humble their 
work; these should rather be thought of more lovingly as 
they do the more unpleasant work. Essentially one in life, 
the whole of humanity forms one body, and poison in any 
part, even the lowest, may paralyse the whole body. We 
can make no real gain at the cost of someone else, while 
any benefit or advance in the path of spirituality is some- 
thing secured not for us alone, but for all. We should 
ever maintain towards those around us an attitude of help- 
fulness and deep sympathy, and of the widest possible 
tolerance and charity, nay, of positive love all around. 

It is the law of the Spirit that, unlike Matter, which 
perishes in the using, it lives by giving, and increases by 
using. Truth never diminishes in the sharing. Knowledge, 
if not shared, becomes a cancer in the brain, but if we 
share it with our ignorant brethren, the torch of knowledge 
might light a thousand other torches without any diminu- 
tion in the original flame. We are pure only in order to- 
go: to the impure, for real purity can never be stained or 
soiled, though it may purify others and lift them toa 
higher standard. So the law of the Brotherhood of 
Humanity lays on us a duty—to raise the sinner and the 
debased to our own purity, to teach the ignorant, to rescue 
the miserable, to feed the starving, to nurse the diseased. 
Parts of one brotherhood, we live in and for others, 
influencing all and being influenced by them. We cannot 
slip a single step backward without weakening the whole 
of humanity, nor rise one step higher without lifting the 
whole towards purity. We should therefore strive to work 
for the good of the whole human family with perfect peace 
and harmony. 


CHAPTER X 
THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 


Question. What ts a Master ? 

Answer. There are Perfect Men, called Adepts, with 
Divinity unfolded in Them—human beings who have com- 
pleted Their human evolution and have nothing more to 
learn so far as human experience in our chain of worlds is 
concerned; who have reached what the Christian calls 
‘salvation,’ and the Hindu and the Buddhist ‘ libera- 
tion’; and who having trodden the ordinary path of men 
have climbed the steeper Path which rises to the super- 
human state. The Path which we have to tread They have 
already trodden, and reached its furthest point, having 
passed from Initiation to Initiation and widened out Their 
Consciousness, till They know not only this, but all the five 
worlds up to Nirvana. A conception of evolution implying 
a gradual expansion of consciousness embodied in ever- 
improving forms underlies the conception of Adeptship, 
and at the apex of such a long evolution stands the Adept, 
embodying in Himself the highest intellectual, moral and 
spiritual developments, possible to man. The One Eternal 
Light is in all of us; only He has cleansed the glass and 
learnt to manifest that light. He has learnt all the lessons 
of humanity and acquired all the experiences the world can 
give. Beyond this, evolution is superhuman. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 373 


A few of these great Adepts, though free from the 
wheel of birth and death, voluntarily take up the burden of 
the flesh and live in physical bodies on earth for the help- 
ing of men, and take pupils who, forsaking all, deSire to 
evolve more rapidly than the bulk of their fellow-men in 
order to serve humanity unselfishly. Such Adepts are 
called Masters. A Master is a man made divine, an Elder 
Brother sharing the same humanity, but elder by the 
greatness of His evolution. A Master must be in a physi- 
cal body and should, as the name implies, take pupils—or 
rather apprentices—less advanced men, to tread the road 
which takes them by a short cut to the summit of human 
evolution. Many other Adepts who reach this level no 
longer take human bodies, but using only the spiritual body 
pass out of touch with this earth, while again there are 
others at this level who are concerned with other lines of 
service to the world. 

Q. How can you show Masters as facts ? What és the 
evidence of Their existence ? 

Ans. There are some to whom even the ideal of Masters 
is valuable and inspiring though they do not know Them 
as facts, for high is the ideal of Mahatmas, 7.¢c., Great 
Spirits. 

First, then, taking the existence of Masters as 
a theory, it is a probable theory on the lines of 
natural evolution; for if evolution were true and reincar- 
nation a fact, there must be such men somewhere. 
Considering the enormous difference between the lowest 
Savage and the highest man of to-day, and also consider- 
ing the space of time for evolution that has elapsed 
Since man first trod this earth, it is not improbable 
that the evolution of some individuals has carried them 
@S much above the higher civilised man of to-day as 


374 ; THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED ° 


the latter is higher than the lowest type of savage in 
existence. Again, looking backwards we find traces of 
mighty civilisations which show that there must have 
existed men of a most advanced type to start them.. 

Then there is the testimony of religions, for there. 
is no great religion that has not founded its belief ona 
Divine Man as its Founder and does not look back to its 
Teacher as to a Man divine in His life. 

Again, there is the historical evidence of religious 
Scriptures with a depth of spiritual knowledge, of philo- 
sophic thought and of insight into human nature, greater 
than what the greatest minds of our time can produce. 
This is not a question of tradition, but of books; not a 
question of theory but of fact; and these books with 
teachings of morality so pure, philosophy so sublime, and 
knowledge so vast, must have had authors. Those authors 
were the Divine Men in the past who have left the 
testimony of Their existence in mighty and sublime 
literatures with Their teaching identical in its main out- 
lines and its moral force. 

There is, furthermore, the testimony of first-hand 
experience, for there are many men in India and else- 
where, who have personal knowledge of the Mahatmas, 
of the Masters who train Their pupils in the higher path of 
what is called the Raja, or the Kingly, Yoga—the Yoga 
which primarily trains the mind rather than the body 
and which works by concentration of the mind, by medi- 
tation, and by the evolution of the higher mental faculties. 
The wonderful book, The Secret Doctrine, and the 
masterpiece of prose-poems, The Voice of the Sslence, 
were written by H. P. Blavatsky, as she herself declared, 
with the help of such Teachers and are in themselves the . 
best testimony to the sources whence they came. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 375 


But if a man wants first-hand evidence, absolute 
demonstration of Their existence, he will have to pay the 
price and will have to take the trouble of being trained, of 
acquiring knowledge and wisdom and of treading the 
Path which the Masters Themselves had to tread before 
They became Members of the Great White Brotherhood. 

Q. What ts the Great White Brotherhood of which a 
Master is a Member, and what ts the object of sts existence ? 

Ans. Each globe within the solar system has a body of 
Ministers and other mighty Officers of the Solar Logos 
who carry out His Plan and form the Occult Hierarchy or 
Inner Government for that globe. Similarly, our world is 
under the control of a definite Spiritual Government, 
carried on from the higher plane, invisible to the physical 
eyes, and there is, beyond and behind all physical happen- 
ings, a mighty Hierarchy of graded order, in the hands 
of which lies the government of the world. It is the 
Members of the Occult Hierarchy who guide all evolu- 
tion, administer the laws of nature and direct the affairs 
of the world. They are in a graded order, ruling, 
teaching and guiding the world, each rank having its 
multifarious duties and carrying them out in perfect 
harmony. They are the Guardians of our humanity 
and are the true Rulers of men and worlds, of whom the 
earthly kings, teachers and guides are but the shadows 
or the symbols. They set up and pull down the so-called 
leaders of the people; They select and reject the candi- 
dates for high offices; kings and statesmen, generals and 
politicians are the pawns in Their mighty game. The 
game is evolution, and its end is the redemption of 
humanity from ignorance into Knowledge, from darkness 
into Light. “ Guardians of the World” They are some- 
times called, because the world is divided into areas, 


376 ' .. HRBOSOPRY EXPLAINED 


each of which is under the care of a Member of the 
Hierarchy. 7 

As the Logos, when in manifestation, works as a 
Trinity—the First, the Second and the Third Logos, 
Shiva, Vishnu and Brahma, or the Father, the Son and 
the Holy Ghost—so the Occult Government of the world 
is in three great departments, and the representation for 
our world of that Great Triangle, “ eternal inthe Heavens,” 
is another Triangle, composed of the three Departmental 
Heads, who are not merely reflections of the Three Aspects 
of the Logos, but are in a very real way actual manifesta- 
tions of Them. They are the Lord of the World, the Lord 
Buddha and the Mahachohan who have reached grades of 
Initiation (to be explained presently) which give Them 
waking consciousness on the planes of nature beyond the 
field of evolution of humanity, where dwells the manifested 
Logos. The Lord of the World is one with the First 
Aspect on the highest of our seven planes and wields the 
Divine Will on earth or brings down to humanity the 
energies of the Atmic or Will or Power Aspect of the 
Logos; the Buddha is united with the Second Aspect 
which dwells on the Anupddaka plane, and distributes to 
the world the Wisdom Aspect, which is incarnate, as it 
were, in Vishnu; the Mahdchohan is utterly one with the 
Third Aspect, which resides on the Nirvanic plane, and 
exercises the divine Activity, t.¢., is the channel of His 
Divine Mind, Creative Activity, for our world. 

The first and second Members of this great Triangle 
are different from the third, being engaged in work of a 
character that does not descend to the physical plane, but 
only to the level of the buddhic body in the case of the 
Lord Buddha, and the Atmic plane in that of the great 
Agent of the First Aspect. Yet without Their higher 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 377 


work none of that at lower levels would be possible, so They 
provide for the transmission of Their influence even to the 
lowest plane through Their Representatives, the Manu 
Vaivasvata and the Lord Maitreya, respectively. 

These two great Adepts stand parallel with the 
Mahachohan on Their respective Rays, both having taken 
the Initiation that bears that name, and thus another 
Triangle is formed, to administer the powers of the Logos 
down to the physical plane. 

The three departments or groups in the Spiritual 
Government, ruling, teaching and guiding the world under 
its inner Spiritual Head who is the King and Monarch of 
our world, are sometimes called the Groups of Rulers, 
Teachers and Guides. 

The first, the Ruling Department—the Department 
of Laws—guides outer evolution, changes the face of the 
surface of our globe, builds and destroys continents, controls 
the destiny of nations, and shapes the types and courses of 
races of men—each race bringing out its characteristic quali- 
ties and gradually contributing its share to the final perfec- 
tion of humanity. This first group, of Rulers, acts by Will- 
Power, which in its lower form is Ichchha or desire. Willand 
Power are the natural characteristics of the Rulers and it’ 
is the force of the Will, by which the Occult Rulers of the 
world work. The Lord of our world is the supreme Head 
of the Hierarchy as well as the Head of the Ruling 
Department or the Group of Rulers. He rules not humanity 
alone, but all the visible and invisible kingdoms of the 
earth—the mineral, vegetable, animal and human kingdoms, 
as well as the vast realms of the elementals and the nature- 
Spirits and the grand and glorious kingdom of the Angels. 
Under the direction of this august Head and His three 


Lieutenants—the Mighty Four—the One who builds up a 
48 


378 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


particular race and is the Representative, in that race, of 
the Ruling Department, is the mighty Being from whom 
our very name of ‘man’ is drawn. He is the Manu, the 
Ideal Man, the type of each race as it is gradually built, 
the perfect man of every race, who gradually develops in 
the race the qualities embodied in Himself. And as the 
name Man means the thinker, the reasoner, so this name of 
the typical man, the Manu, stands for the Ruler, the Law- 
giver of the Race. The Manus are specially related to the 
evolution of races. There is only one Manu to arace, 
and there is always a Manu at work whenever a great race 
is to be born into the world. He directs the physical 
development of the race, forming the new race-type by 
‘modification from that already existing, according to the 
Plan of the Logos set before Him by the Lord of the 
‘World, guides its migrations, gives each people its polity 
and directs each to do its appointed work. His term of 
office begins with the slow gathering of the egos who are 
going to work under Him at the commencement of the new 
race,.and through all the successive sub-races as they 
appear one by one. During the hundreds and thousands 
of years of the history of a root-race, He directs the 
building of variant after variant of the sub-race, and 
Himself incarnates in each sub-race to set the form 
for it. 

The second or the Teaching Department—that of 
Religion and Education—is under the Lord Buddha, as 
stated before, who, as the Head of the Second Ray in the 
Occult Hierarchy of our globe, devotes Himself to that 
part of the work which lies in the higher worlds and entrusts 
the work for the lower planes to His Assistant and 
Representative, whom we know as the Founder of every 
faith, the Inspirer of every prophet, the Guide of spiritual 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 379 


evolution, the Master of Masters, the World-Teacher, the 
supreme Teacher of Angels and men. He is known as the 
Jagat-Guru (World-Teacher) among the Hindus, and as 
the Bodhisattva (He whose essence is wisdom) among the 
Buddhists. The World-Teacher watches over the emotion- 
al and intellectual development of His race, and arranges 
for each people such religions, arts and sciences as shall 
enable it to play its réle in the drama written by the Logos. 
He definitely undertakes as His work to look after the 
religious welfare of the world and its education along 
evolutionary lines; guides, blesses and maintains the 
various religions of the world, founded in outline by Him- 
self ; appoints one of His assistants as the special Guide 
or Protector of a_ special religion—His own benedic- 
tion flowing ever upon all the living religions of the 
time—and manifests from age to age to Inspire a new 
religion, to strike anew the note of a fresh chord of 
Spiritual life, to proclaim the ancient message in a new 
form in the world of men. As the races are built into 
the final perfection of humanity, so the religions also 
are built to bring about,one by one, the great qualities 
which are needed in spiritual evolution, until both 
outer and inner perfection shall crown the working out 
of the mighty Plan, made by the Divine Architect for 
our humanity. This second Group of Teachers acts by 
Jiiinam or Knowledge. Having, as Teachers, the detailed 
knowledge of our world, They act as the channel of the 
Wisdom Aspect of the Logos, so that when a new type of 
man is formed by the Rulers, the Teachers step in to 
teach that new type and to help it to evolve. As the 
Ruling Department shapes the material destiny of man 
and his earth, so does the Teaching Department shape the 
Spiritual destiny of man. 


380 + ®ROSOPHY BXPLAINED 


- - Phe third great Group, the Group of Kriya or 
Activity—the Department of Guides—carries on all the 
activities of our world, outside the ruling and the teaching, 
under the Mahachohdin who is the great “ Keeper of the 
Records ’’ of the evolutionary processes of the globe, and 
who supervises and directs all the activities of the Mem- 
bers of the Great Brotherhood, as They develop stage by 
stage the great Plan. 

For the entire period of a root-race the Manu 
works out the details of its evolution, and the Bodhisattva, 
as World-Teacher, Minister of Education and Religion, 
helps its members to develop whatever of spirituality is 
possible for them at that stage, while the Mahachohan 
directs the minds of men so that the different forms of 
culture and civilisation shall be unfolded according to the 
cyclic plan. Head and Heart are These, and the Hand 
with five fingers, all active in the world, moulding the 
Race into one organic being, a Heavenly Man. 

The Logos, a Trinity in activity, has an aspect of 
Him as the Unmanifested. Similarly, behind the Great 
Three—the King who rules, the Prime Minister who plans, 
and the General who executes—is a Fourth, the Silent 
Watcher, who in the last Round was the Lord of the 
World of our globe, and now “ watches and waits ’’ behind 
the Three, doing for man and God mighty actions which 
are incomprehensible to our present limited human 
consciousness. 

On the Path of Holiness a man has to pass through 
four stages before attaining to the level of the Asekha or 
Adept, which is the goal set before humanity during this 
chain-period to become free from the necessity of reincar- 
nation. Seven paths then open before Him for His 
choosing: He may enter into the blissful omniscience and 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 38x 


omnipotence of Nirvana, ‘taking the Dharmakdya 
Vesture’; He may enter on ‘the Spiritual Period,’ 
‘taking the Sambhogakdya vesture’; He may become 
part of that treasure-house of spiritual forces on which 
the Agents of the Logos draw for Their work, ‘ taking the 
Nirmanakaya vesture’; He may remain a Member of the 
Occult Hierarchy which rules and guards the world in 
which He has reached perfection ; He may pass on to the 
next chain, to aid in building up its forms ; He may enter 
the splendid Angel or Deva Evolution; He may give 
Himself to the immediate service of the Logos—join the 
‘Staff Corps of the Logos ’—to be used by Him in any 
part of the Solar System. Thus a limited number of 
Those who have attained the Asekha level still work 
directly for humanity and are divided into two classes, 
Those who retain physical bodies and Those who do not. 
The latter, spoken of under the name of Nirmanakdyas, 
suspended, as it were, between this world and Nirvana, 
devote Their time and energy to the generation of 
Spiritual forces poured into a kind of reservoir for the use 
of the Members of the Hierarchy in Their work of helping 
humanity. 

The still more limited number of Adepts who 
retain physical bodies remain in close touch with us, 
doing all the work necessary for our evolution, and it 
is these Supermen who form the Occult Hierarchy. 
They are a small number of advanced men of different 
nations, not living together, though in continual commu- 
nication on higher planes. In many cases They continue 
to live each in His own country, and Their powers remain 
unsuspected among those who live near Them. 

The Great White Brotherhood includes the Occult 
Hierarchy of Adepts as well as the initiated disciples— 


382 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


disciples who have passed through one or more of the 
four great Initiations—official examinations with subse- 
quent expansion of consciousness at each stage—to be 
explained presently, and who live and labour for the most 
part unknown in the everyday world, carrying on the 
work assigned to them by their superiors. 

The four lower grades consist of initiated disciples ; ; 
the grade of the Master is the fifth in the Brotherhood, 
reached at the fifth of the great Initiations, that which 
gives ‘liberation’ or ‘salvation’. The grade beyond 
the Masters is entered, as are all the grades, by its own 
Initiation, the sixth or the ‘ Chohdn’ Initiation—a Rajput 
word used as a title of respect, like the English word 
‘Lord’ applied to a judge or a bishop. These great 
Beings, the Chohans, guide all the forces which make 
for evolution in our world, and the countless Intelligences 
that guide and shape these are under Their direction. 
There are seven main lines of evolution, seven Rays, 
spoken of before, and the Chohdns are concerned with 
these, with a Chohdin as the Head of each Ray, while 
the Masters work under Them, each in His own group, 
or in the line along which He has evolved. Then the 
seventh of the great Initiations qualifies for the higher 
offices, those of the Manu, the Bodhisattva and the 
Mahichohan. An Adept of the First Ray who takes the 
seventh Initiation usually enters thereafter upon the 
arduous duties of a Manu of a root-race on a globe. 
After His work as Manu is completed, He passes 
on to take the eighth Initiation as a Pratyeka Bud- 
dha, and zons later to take the ninth Initiation, that 
of a Lord of the World. The Tenth Initiation is the 
one taken by the Silent Watcher in the Great White 
Brotherhood. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 383 


The Buddha Initiation is the highest achievable on 
this earth on the Second Ray, and it is taken by a Bodhi- 
sattva or World-Teacher as the crown of His work of ages 
for humanity. Of the other five Rays from the third to the 
seventh, the highest Initiation as a member of this humanity 
is that of the Mahachohan. This office is held only by one 
Adept at a time, and according to the dominant influence 
in evolution, at any given epoch, of a Ray and its sub- 
rays, is the type of the Adept who holds that exalted office. 

The object of the existence of the Great White 
Brotherhood is to do God’s Will by carrying out His Plan, 
which is evolution, and all the members of that Brother- 
hood work in true hierarchical order, according to their 
qualifications, each having his work in a particular 
department of the Plan. Into the hands of the Adepts 
of the Brotherhood the Logos commits His Power, 
Wisdom and Love, and They distribute the energy of the 
Logos into all the many departments of human activity. 
Religion and philosophy, science and art, culture and 
civilisation, are inspired and guided by Them; either 
incarnating among men, or from the invisible, They move 
men and nations as pawns on a board, striving to win 
men over to co-operate with the Divine Plan which is the 
evolution of humanity as a whole in the solar system. 

Q. Can you say something of the Great Ones in thts 
Occult Hierarchy ? Where do They live ? 

Ans. 1—4. ‘The King’ and His three Pupils.—‘ The 
King,’ the Lord of the World of our globe, is not an 
Adept of our humanity ; the position which He fills is too 
high to be held by an Adept of our human evolution. 

About six and a half million years ago, during the 
middle of the third—the Lemurian—root-race, there 
atrived on our earth a band of Great Ones from the planet 


384 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Venus which is considerably further advanced in evolution 
than our earth-chain. With the Leader of the band came 
His three Lieutenants and twenty-six other Adepts as 
assistants. Most of these Great Ones, called Lords of the 
Flame and Children of the Fire-mist, also Sons of the 
Light and Sons of the Fire, have long ago done Their 
work of helping our evolution and have passed away from 
our earth, but Their Leader—the Great Ruler of this 
world under the Solar Deity—still holds the position of 
the King who guides and controls all evolution upon our 
planet and represents the Logos as far as this world is 
concerned. Within His consciousness is recorded every- 
thing which happens on all the seven planes of our globe. 
Since His mighty aura interpenetrates and surrounds the 
entire earth, He is aware of all that happens within that 
aura, and no act is so secret but He knows. Without 
approval of the King—the One Initiator—none can be 
initiated into the Great White Brotherhood, and it is His 
Star which flashes in assent over the head of the Adept- 
Initiator. When that ‘“‘ Star of Initiation ”’ so flashes out, 
it is not sent there by an effort of His will, because it was 
already there. His mighty aura, the influence of His 
power, surrounds the whole globe ; but when for purposes 
of His own He chooses to make that tremendous power 
manifest at a certain spot, that portion of the mighty aura 
flashes out for a moment in the likeness of the Star, the 
symbol of His immanence for our earth. 

In His mind He holds the whole Plan of evolution 
at some high level of which we know nothing ; He is the 
Force which drives the whole world-machine, the Embodi- 
ment of the Divine Will on this planet; and strength, 
courage, decision, perseverance and all similar character- 
istics, when they show themselves down here in the lives 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 385 


of men, are reflections from Him. In His hands are the 
powers of cyclic destruction, for He can deal directly with 
cosmic forces outside our chain of worlds.. His work is 
probably connected with humanity en masse rather than 
with individuals, but when He does influence any single 
person, it is through the Atma, and not through the ego, 
that His influence is brought to bear. 

At a certain point in the progress of an aspirant on 
the Path, he is formally presented to the Lord of the 
World, and those who have thus met Him face to face 
speak of Him as a handsome youth in appearance, dignified, 
benignant beyond all description, yet with a mien of 
omniscient, inscrutable majesty, conveying such a sense of 
resistless power that some have found themselves unable 
to bear His gaze, and have veiled their faces in awe. 

Hindu tradition calls Him Sanat Kumara, the 
“Eternal Virgin-Youth,” for His body, though physical, 
is not born of woman, but was made by Kriyashakti or 
will-power, and it never ages, and He is in appearance not 
a man but a ‘“ Youth of sixteen summers”’. Round Him 
stand the Four Great Devarajahs or the Rulers of the 
Elements, who adjust the Karmas of men, and the great 
Devas and Angels are His courtiers, ready to do His 
bidding. 

During each world- period, there are three successive 
Lords of the World, and the present Holder of the Office is 
already the Third. Once in every seven years He conducts 
at Shamballa a great ceremony, when all the Adepts and 
even some Initiates below that grade are invited, and have 
thus an opportunity to come into touch with Their great 
Leader. At cther times He deals only with the Heads of 
the Official Hierarchy, except when for special reasons 


He summons others to. His presence. 
49 


386 ‘THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


_ With Him are His three pupils and Lieutenants, 
named Sananda,' Sanaka and Sandtana in Hindu tradi- 
tion, who too came from Venus. When the life-wave 
shal] pass from Earth to Mercury, it is these Three who 
will become in turn Lords of Mercury, and guide all 
evolution on that globe. Popular Buddhism speaks 
of Them as Pratyeka Buddhas, the “ Solitary Buddhas ”. 
They are given this name because They stand at 
the level] of the Buddha or Supreme Teacher. And 
because They did not teach or establish world-religions, 
Their work being that of the Rulers and not of the 
Teachers, men in their blindness, dimly groping after 
the fact of this superhuman existence, spoke of Them 
as solitary Buddhas—alone, isolated—and even went so far 
as to apply to Them the monstrous adjective ‘selfish’. 
Their love is as great as that of the Buddhas, but belong- 
ing to the First or Ruling Ray, They give to men Power, 
and not Wisdom as done by Those belonging to the Second 
or Teaching Ray. 

The Hindu Puranas speak of these Kumdras—“ the 
Four’, ‘“‘the One and the Three ’’—as living in an oasis 
in the Gobi Desert, in the mystic city of Shamballa, which 
is often spoken of as the White or the Sacred Island, 
in remembrance of the time when it was an island in the 
Central Asian Sea, and which is part of Central Asia, very 
carefully guarded from intrusion, but still existing. 

5S. The Lord Gautama Buddha.—The present 
Buddha is the Lord Gautama who took His last birth in 
India about two thousand five hundred years ago, and in 
that incarnation finished His series of lives as Bodhisattva, 
and succeeded the previous Buddha Kasyapa as Head 
of the Second Ray in the Occult Hierarchy of our 
globe. Seven Buddhas appear in succession during 4 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 387 


world-period, one for each root-race, and each in turn takes 
charge of the special work of the Second Ray for the 
whole world, devoting Himself to that part of it which lies 
in the higher worlds, while He entrusts to His Assistant 
and Representative, the Bodhisattva, the office of World- 
Teacher for the lower planes. 

Our present Buddha was the first of our humanity 
to attain that stupendous height, the previous Buddhas 
having been the product of other evolutions. A very 
special effort was needed on His part to prepare Himself 
for this lofty post, an effort so stupendous that He is 
spoken of constantly by the Buddhists as the Mahabhinish- 
kramana, the Great Sacrifice. Many thousands of years ago 
there arose the need for one of the Adepts to become the 
World-Teacher of the fourth root-race, for the time had 
come when humanity had to provide such a Teacher for 
itself or go unaided ; but we are told that no one had quite 
reached the level required for the incurring of so tremendous 
a responsibility. The first-fruits of our humanity at that 
period were two Brothers who stood equal in occult 
development, One being He whom we now call the Lord 
Gautama Buddha, and the Other our present World- 
Teacher, the Lord Maitreya. Out of His great love for 
humanity the Lord Gautama instantly offered to make 
Himself ready to undertake whatever additional effort 
might be necessary to attain the required development, 
and life after life He practised special virtues, each life 
showing out some great quality achieved. 

After His nomination as Bodhisattva He came 
many times as a great Spiritual Teacher and incarnated 
under different names through a period spreading over 
hundreds of thousands of years. Little is known of His 
work in the fourth root-race, but He came several times to 


388 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


the sub-races of the fifth or the Aryan root-race, and used 
a symbol a little different each time, but always enwrapping 
the same fundamental] Truth. 

To the stock of our race, the first sub-race of the 
Aryans, the Great One came in Central Asia, about 60,000 
B.c., under the name of Vyasa, and gave in that far-off 
time the Sandtana Dharma, the Eternal Religion, the 
Wisdom Religion with its Vedas and its Puranas, and 
taught the one truth by the figure and symbol of the Sun; 
that the Sun in the heavens—the visible symbol of the 
Godhead—and the Sun in the heart of man—the Self 
individualised in him—were both identical, that Self is one, 
“the Person in the Sun,’ that all selves are rays of that 
Sun, and that man must find the Reality within himself ere 
he can know it as a certain truth outside him. 

To the second sub-race He came in ancient Egypt 
and Arabia about 40,000 B.c., under the name of Tehuti 
or Thoth, known later in Greece as Hermes—Hermes 
Trismegistes, the Thrice Greatest—who was called the 
Father of All Wisdom. He then clothed His message in 
the symbology of Light, and said that the Light in the 
heaven above us is identical with the Light in the heart 
within us, and that when men have once seen the Light in 
their own hearts, then they can look abroad and see it 
everywhere in heaven and earth. 

To the third sub-race—the Iranians—who founded 
the mighty empire of Persia lasting from 30,000 B.c. to 
2,000 B.c., He went about 29,700 B.c. under the name of 
Zarathushtra, better known as Zoroaster—the first and 
greatest of the twenty-nine Zoroasters—and garbed the one 
truth in Fire—Fire in the heart of man, Fire in the temple 
for the worshippers, Fire in the sky that gave light to the 
world. Zoroaster was the Messenger of the Fire, drew 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 389 


down Fire from heaven, was caught up, when His mission 
was over, in a cloud of Fire and rapt away from the sight 
of men. 

Once again he came to the fourth sub-race—the 
Keltic, the ancient Greeks and the Romans—about 7,000 
B.c., and now as Orpheus He spoke in Music, and by the 
mysteries of Sound and Harmony, He taught the unfolding 
of the Spirit in man. 

Then the Great One returned to earth but once 
more, this time to the original root-stock, transferred from 
Central Asia to India by constant migrations between 
18,875 B.c. and 9,700 B.c. His life then on earth as 
Siddhartha Gautama has been wonderfully told in Sir 
Edwin Arnold’s The Light of Asta. Born in 623 B.c. as 
Prince Siddhartha of the Gautama clan in Northern India, 
He became an ascetic, counted all worldly things as dross, 
wandered in the forest for six years to seek the Cause of 
Sorrow and the Ending of Sorrow, got final illumination 
under the Sacred Tree at Gayd, became a Buddha, an 
Enlightened One, and founded the Buddhist religion, 
which, with about five hundred million followers, still 
outnumbers any other faith on earth. The attaining of 
Buddhahood is a definite step, and when a World-Teacher 
takes that step and becomes a Buddha, He passes away 
from this globe into wider fields of work. So when after 
teaching for some forty-five years of life, proclaiming the 
Four Noble Truths, the Noble Eightfold Path and the 
Triple Gem, and drawing round Himself all those who in 
previous lives had been His pupils, Gautama Buddha 
passed away from earth in 543 B.c., He handed over His 
Office of World-Teacher to His beloved Brother who had 
come side by side with Him through many ages, the Lord 
Maitreya, the Great One who is the World-Teacher of 


_ te-day, and is honoured through ail India under the name 
of Krishna and whom Christendom calls the Christ. 

We are told that because of the great strain of 
many ages of effort there were certain points in the work 
of the Lord Buddha which He had not time to perfect 
utterly. It is usual for a Bodhisattva when He has lived 
His final life and become a Buddha—when He has entered 
into glory, bearing His sheaves with Him, as it is put in 
the Christian Scriptures—to hand over His external work 
entsrely to His Successor, and devote Himself to His 
labours for humanity at higher levels. Whatever may be 
those manifold activities of a Dhyani Buddha, they do not 
bring Him again into birth on earth; but because of the 
peculiar circumstances surrounding the life of the Lord 
Gautama, two supplementary acts were performed. 

The first was the sending by the Lord of the World, 
the One Initiator, of one of His three Pupils, who are all 
Lords of the Flame from Venus, as stated before, to take 
earthly incarnation immediately after the attainment of 
Buddhahood by the Lord Gautama in order that bya 
very short life spent in travelling over India He might 
establish certain centres of religion called mathas. His 
name in that incarnation was Shankaracharya—not he 
who wrote the commentaries, but the great Founder of his 
line, who, more than two thousand years ago, founded a 
certain school of Hindu philosophy, revived Hinduism by 
putting new life into its forms and by gathering together 
many of the teachings of the Buddha, forbade animal 
sacrifices and accomplished certain occult work in 
connection with the higher planes of nature, which was 
of considerable importance to the later life of India. 

The second supplementary act was undertaken by 
the Lord Gautama Himself. Instead of devoting Himself 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 392 


wholly to other and higher work, He has remained suffi- 
ciently in touch with His world to be reached by the invo- 
cation of His Successor when necessary, so that His advice 
and help can still be obtained in any great emergency. He 
also undertook to return to the world once in each year, 
and to shed upon it a flood of blessing. The occasion 
selected by the Lord Buddha for giving this blessing to the 
world with a wonderful outpouring of His own special type. 
of force is the full moon day of the Indian month of 
Vaishakh (called in Ceylon Wesak, and usually corre- 
sponding to the English month of May), the anniversary of 
all the momentous occurrences of His last earthly life—His 
birth, His attainment of Buddhahood, and His departure 
from the physical body. 

In connection with this visit of His, and quite apart 
from its tremendous esoteric significance, an exoteric cere- 
mony is performed on the physical plane, on a small plateau 
surrounded by low hills, on the northern side of the 
Himalayas, near the frontier of Nepal and about four 
hundred miles west of the city of Lhassa, at which the 
Lord Buddha actually shows Himself in the presence of a 
crowd of ordinary pilgrims. 

After the performance of certain ceremonies by the 
Lord Maitreya and other members of the Great Brother- 
hood, “the Lord Buddha appears as a gigantic figure 
floating in the air just above the southern hills.” ‘The 
Figure which floats above the hills is of enormous size, but 
exactly reproduces the form and features of the body in 
which the Lord last lived on earth. He appears seated 
cross-legged, with the hands together, dressed in the yellow 
robe of the Buddhist monk, but wearing it so as to leave 
the right arm bare. No description can give an idea of 
the face—a face truly God-like, for it combines calmness 


392 : \* SHEOSOPHY EXPLAINED. 


and power, wisdom and love in an expression containing 
all that our minds can imagine of the Divine. We may 
gay that the complexion is clear yellowish-white, and the 
features clearly cut ; that the forehead is broad and noble; 
the eyes large, luminous and of a deep dark-blue; the nose 
slightly aquiline; the lips red and firmly set; but all this 
puts before us merely the outer mask and gives but a little 
grasp of the living whole. The hair is black—almost blue- 
black—and wavy; curiously it is neither worn long accord- 
ing to Indian custom nor shaved off altogether in the 
manner of Oriental monks, but is cut off just before it 
reaches the shoulders, parted in the centre and swept back 
from the forehead. The story is told that when the Prince 
Siddartha left home to seek the truth, he seized his long 
hair and cut it off close above his head with a sweep of his 
sword, and that ever afterwards he kept it at the same 
length.” The order in the bands of colour in the aura of 
the Lord, as He thus appears floating in the air, is this: 
after intense white light nearest to the Figure, blue, yellow, 
crimson, white, orange-red and the five colours in their 
order radiating laterally. That aura, spoken of in 
Chapter III, is described in Oriental Sacred Books as 
including people who were three miles from Him when 
last He was on the physical plane. 

Though the Lord thus shows Himself before the 
pilgrims, it is not known whether He shows Himself to the 
pilgrims; they all prostrate themselves at the moment 
when He appears, but that may be only in imitation of the 
prostration of the Adepts—some of whom generally 
materialise Themselves so as to be seen by the pilgrims— 
who do see the Lord Gautama. It is probable that some 
at least of the pilgrims have seen Him for themselves, for 
the existence of the ceremony is widely known among the 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 393 


Beddhists of Central Asia, and it is spoken of as the 
appearance of the Shadow, or Reflection, of the Buddha. 

All members of the Great White Brotherhood, 
except the King Himself and His three Disciples, usually 
attend this ceremony, and any earnest Theosophist can be 
present at it in his astral body by so arranging matters as 
to put his physical body to sleep an hour or so before the 
exact moment of full moon, and to be undisturbed until 
about an hour after it. 

6. The Lord Maitreya.—The Lord Maitreya took 
up the office of Bodhisattva when the Lord Gautama laid 
it down. One of His first steps at that time was to take 
advantage of the tremendous magnetism generated in the 
world by the presence of the Buddha, by arranging that 
great Teachers should simultaneously appear in many 
different parts of the earth ; so that within a comparative- 
ly short space of time we find not only the Buddha 
Himself, Shri Shankaracharya and, Mahavira in India, 
but also Mithra in Persia, Lao-t3e and Confucius in 
China and Pythagoras in ancient Greece. 

Twice He has Himself appeared—as Krishna in 
the Indian plains, and as Christ amidst the hills of Pales- 
tine. First He came to His ancient people in India 
twenty-five centuries ago, and founded that cult which 
even now holds within it the vast majority of the Indian 
people. Manifesting as Krishna—that marvellous Child 
of eastern stories who is an embodied Love—He pro- 
vided a supreme Object of devotion for those to whom 
Bhakti (devotion) is the most direct road to the truth. 
The first time that each World-Teacher comes, He is 
born in the usual way, though subsequently He generally 
takes a body prepared for Him by a pupil of special purity 
and spiritual development ; and so coming as Shri Krishna 

60 


394 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


He naturally did take birth as a little child; but His life 
on earth was then very brief, for He passed away asa 
youth. Still so marvellous was His out-welling love, so 
exquisite His compassionate tenderness, that even those 
few years of mortal life have changed, as it were, the 
whole aspect of Hinduism, and have made it a religion of 
Devotion whereas before it was .rather a religion of 
Knowledge. Through high philosophy and intellectual 
thinking, India was losing her faith in devotion, and the 
work of the Supreme Teacher then consisted specifically 
in making her what she is to-day—a land where the divine 
Form of Shri Krishna holds the hearts of two hundred and 
fifty million people captive in chains. This incarnation as 
the Child Krishna—the Krishna of the Gopis—who 
appeared in Braja about 5oo B.c., is different from that of 
Shri Krishna of the Mahabharata, about 3,000 B.c., though 
in both cases it was the Lord Maitreya who appeared, 
having been overshadowed, in the earlier incarnation, by 
the then Bodhisattva, the present Lord Buddha. 

Five centuries later He came again, but was not 
born as a Child. Alli Christian legends which centre 
round the childhood belong to the Master Jesus, not to the 
Lord Christ. The duality of Jesus and the Christ is a 
very, very old idea. The Gnostics taught it in the early 
century of the Church, and the Manichzans held it 
among many others. 

In the record of the New Testament we find the 
story of a Hebrew youth, born about a century before the 
beginning of the Christian era, trained partly in Egypt, 
and partly in the monasteries of the Essenes, coming forth 
at about the age of thirty to be a teacher among his 
people. On him decended the Spirit of the Holiest, and 
descending on him it abode, and that moment of descent 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 395 


was the coming of the Christ to occupy the chosen body 
which He had selected for His stay on earth. This is 
described in the New Testament as the Baptism of Jesus 
in the Jordan, when there came down upon him this new 
Power—that is, when the Lord of Love took over the 
body of the disciple—and he was thenceforward known as 
Jesus the Christ. It was after this that the Ministry 
began, and the Lord Himself then preached and healed, 
and gathered disciples. Very probably He did not hold 
the body all the time, but may well have left it at times to 
the original occupant who, in such cases, always stands 
by as an attendant. 

After a brief life of three years among men in the 
days of Queen Salome, a life of uttermost beneficence, 
wondrous healings and exquisite teaching, the body in 
which He had dwelt was murdered by a terrible stoning 
during a riot in the city of Jerusalem, in the very court of 
of the Temple itself, and afterwards taken up and hanged 
in mockery on a tree by those who had slain Him. The 
death of the physica] body did not interrupt the work of 
the Christ, as He continued to teach His disciples, visiting 
them in His subtle body, for over forty years, probably for 
many more. 

In the incarnation of the Bodhisattva as Krishna, 
the great feature was always love ; and again in His birth 
in Palestine, love was the central feature of His teaching. 
He said: “ This new commandment I give unto you, that 
ye love one another as I have loved you.” His closest 
disciple, S. John, insisted most strongly upon the same 
idea: “He that loveth not knoweth not God, for God is 
Love.” 

Even so long ago as 22,605 B.c., as the High Priest 
of the great Atlantean religion, the Lord Maitreya preached 


396 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


the doctrine of.love which is so characteristically His own, 
telling all the pilgrims to a certain holy city in Yucatan 
the emphasis that must be laid upon that quality: “ Love 
is life,” He said, “ the only life that is real. A man who 
ceases to love is already dead. All conditions in life are 
to be judged fortunate or unfortunate according to the 
opportunities that they offer for love. Love will come 
under the most unlikely circumstances, if men will but 
allow it to come. Without this all other qualifications are 
only as water lost in the sand.” 

The ordinary Orientalists in the West do not 
understand why the ‘ Krishna-cult,’ with its unbounded 
devotion and perfect self-surrender to the Object of love, 
which suddenly sprang up five centuries before the 
Christian era, is, in many points, so very like Christianity ; 
why it has so much said in it of divine grace, of the 
helping of man by God, of the lifting up of the helpless 
and the sinner. They cannot understand how these 
strange likenesses to Christianity appear in a pre-Christian 
form of worship. They do not dream that the secret 
lies in the fact that it is the same Lord of Love 
who is the central Object of devotion in both, who is 
worshipped under the name of Krishna in India as. 
He is worshipped in Christendom under the name of 
Christ. 

The Bodhisattva also occupied occasionally the body 
of Tsong-kA-pa, the great Tibetan religious reformer, about 
the fourteenth century A.D. Though asthe Lord of the 
Religions of the World, He is responsible for all the religions 
in the original form in which they were founded, He does 
not always go out personally into the world, but sends some 
of His disciples, for minor activities. Hence throughout 
the centuries He has sent forth a stream of His pupils, 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 397 


including Nagarjuna, Aryasanga, Ramanujicharya, 
Madhvacharya and many others, who founded new sects 
or threw new light upon the mysteries of religion, and 
among these was one of His pupils who was sent to found 
the Muhammadan faith. 

In the person of the Lord Maitreya the influence 
that is especially noticeable is the radiance of His all- 
embracing Love. He is wearing a body of the Keltic race 
at the present time, though when He comes forth to the 
world to teach His people, as He intends to do very 
shortly, He will make use of a body prepared for Him 
by one of His disciples. ‘“ His is a face of wondrous 
beauty, strong and yet most tender, with rich hair 
flowing like red gold about His shoulders. His beard 
is pointed, as in some of the old pictures, and His eyes, 
of a wonderful violet, are like twin flowers, lixe stars, 
like deep and holy pools filled with the waters of ever- 
lasting peace. His smile is dazzling beyond words, and 
a blinding glory of Light surrounds Him, intermingled 
with that marvellous rose-coloured glow which ever shines 
from the Lord of Love.” 

The aura of the Lord Maitreya in its normal 
condition is about two and a half miles in radius. The 
arrangement of the bands of colour in this aura is different 
from that in the aura of the Lord Gautama. The heart 
of the aura of the Lord Maitreya, the “ Buddha of. 
Compassion ”, is blinding white light just as in the case of 
the Lord Gautama, the “ Buddha of Wisdom”; but in 
the former, after the central white light, come in succession 
the bands of rose, yellow, vivid green, blue and violet, 
and outside the violet again a broad band of the most 
glorious pale rose, into which the violet imperceptibly 
melts ; outside of all comes the radiation of mixed colours, 


398 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


just as in the case of the Lord Gautama, or of any Master 
or even Arhat. 

A point which seems worthy of notice is that in the 
aura of the Lord Maitreya the colours come exactly in the 
same order as in the solar spectrum, though orange and 
indigo are omitted. First the rose (which is a form of 
red), then the yellow, shading into green, blue, violet, in 
succession. And then it goes on into the ultra-violet, 
melting into rose, the spectrum beginning again in a higher 
octave, just as the lowest astral follows upon the highest 
physical. 

“We may think of Him as seated in the great front 
room of His house in the Himalayas, the room with many 
windows, that overlooks the gardens and the terraces and, 
far below, the rolling Indian plains; or in flowing robes 
of white, edged with a deep border of gold, as walking 
in His garden in the cool of the evening, among the 
glorious flowers, whose perfume fills the surrounding air 
with a rich, sweet fragrance.” 

This garden is on a southern slope of the Hima- 
layas, overlooking a vast expanse of the plains of India, 
which stretch away to the far horizon. It is sheltered, 
lying in a hollow, and protected by a pinewood at the 
back which curves round on the right. Beyond this wood, 
and a little eastwards, is the very ancient stone house, 
with pillared and wide verandah, wherein dwells the Manu 
of our Race, the great Lord Vaivasvata. 

Now is the time ripe for the Lord Maitreya to 
appear again on the physical plane, and He will surely 
come, within a very few years— come quickly ’—and it 
is stated by those who know that the same mode of 
manifestation will take place in the present day, that the 
Great Teacher is even now preparing for His coming 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 399 


by training one of His disciples to serve Him as Jesus 
served Him long ago, and that He has already chosen 
twelve Apostles who will, as of yore, first surround Him 
and then carry His message to the outer world. 

7. The Mahdchohin.—He is the Chief of the 
Guides, the Head of the third great Group, and all who 
work on the five out of the seven lines of evolution for our 
world—the seven Rays—outside the Ruling and the 
Teaching, are in subordination to Him, so that everything 
may be quite orderly, and all the Groups may co-operate 
in the evolution of the world as a whole. 

The Mahdchohan is the type of the Statesman, 
the great Organiser, though He has also many military 
qualities. He wears an Indian body, and is tall and thin, 
with a sharp profile, very fine and clear-cut, and no hair 
on the face. His face is rather stern, with a strong, 
Square chin; His eyes are deep and penetrating, and 
He speaks somewhat abruptly, as a soldier speaks. He 
generally wears Indian robes and a white turban. His 
aura has been observed to have a radius of two miles in 
its norma] condition. 

8, 9. The Manus, Lord Chakshusha and Lord 
Vaivasvata.—Only two Manus now remain with our 
humanity, the Manus of the fourth and fifth root-races. 
The Lord Chakshusha Manu who founded the fourth 
root-race, the Atlantean, over a million years ago, is still 
charged with the care of the larger part of the population 
of the globe and looks after those hundreds of millions of 
Asiatic peoples—the fourth-race nations—of whom the 
chief are the Chinese, the Japanese, the Burmese and 
the Siamese. 

The Manu Chakshusha is a regal figure, Chinese 
by birth, and of. very high caste. He has the high 


oo ; THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


‘Mongolian cheek-bones, and His face looks as though 
it wete delicately carven from old ivory. He generally 
wears magnificent robes of flowing cloth-of-gold. As a 
rule old pupils of Masters do not come into contact with 
Him in their regular work, except when it happens that 
they have to deal with a pupil belonging to His root-race. 

The Lord Vaivasvata Manu is the Manu of the 
Aryan or the fifth root-race. A million years ago, He 
began the slow process of selection of likely members for 
His far-off race. About 100,000 B.c. He drafted these 
into a tribe and, in order that His work may be started 
definitely, He separated it off from the then existing fifth 
sub-race of the Atlantean or the fourth root-race. He 
led off His people, in 79,797 B.c., from an island in what 
is now the Atlantic Ocean, took them across Africa to 
Arabia, and settled them there for a time. Later on, He 
led and settled His infant Race by several migrations on 
the shores of the Gobi sea, now a vast desert in Asia. A 
fairly satisfactory type was reached after many troubles 
and massacres, and from 60,000 B.c. onward that fifth 
root-race grew and flourished exceedingly. 

Vaivasvata Manu sent off many great emigrations 
from time to time and often led them Himself. With one 
of these, He built up the second sub-race in the empires of 
Arabia and South Africa, about 40,000 B.c.; and with 
another, the third sub-race in Persia, about 30,000 B.C. ; 
one spread over Europe, making Greece and Rome, the 
fourth sub-race, and another shaped the fifth sub-race, 
the Germans and the English. He took down into India 
the dwellers in the Gobi sea settlement—the Mother of the 
fifth root-race—by several migrations between 18,875 
B.c. and 9,700 B.c., and they conquered India, settled 
down and reared a fine civilisation. The Hindus look 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 4o1 


upon the Manu as their Law-giver, and still call them- 
selves the “ Sons of Manu ” owing to the peculiarity about 
the work of Manu that the whole of the root-race takes 
origin in Him and that He is literally the Father of His 
Race. He is now building a new sub-race, the sixth, the 
Austral-American, chiefly over in America and also in 
Australia and New Zealand. Out of that fine type, the 
future Manu, the Master Morya who is at present the 
Lieutenant of Vaivasvata Manu, will choose the materials 
for His sixth root-race, and later on will settle them in a 
Colony in Lower California and shape them into the new 
type given to Him by the King. 

The Lord Vaivasvata Manu is the tallest of all the 
Adepts, being six feet eight inches in height, and perfect- 
ly proportioned. He is the Representative Man of our 
fifth root-race, its prototype, and every member of that 
race is directly descended from Him. The Manu hasa 
very striking face of great power, with an aquiline nose, a 
full and flowing brown beard, and brown eyes. “ Our 
Manu is living in the Himalayas, not far from the house 
of the Lord Maitreya, and He comes sometimes to His 
great Brother’s house. He is a magnificent-looking man, 
with a great beard rolling down over His chest in glowing 
waves of brown shot with gold, and masses of glorious 
hair, wave-like, a lion-head of unsurpassable force and 
power. Tall is He, and of king-like majesty, with keen 
eyes piercing as an eagle’s, tawny and brilliant with golden 
lights.”’ 

Io. The “ Nilgiri Master” or Rishi Agastya—What 
the Lord Vaivasvata Manu does for the whole Aryan root- 
race and the lands it occupies, this Maha- Rishi, “‘ Seventh 
of the Seven”—of the seven sages or Saptarishi— 


also on the First Ray, does for India, the Mother-Country 
6} 


40m = =°—“it‘“‘ THRESH EXPLAINED 

ofthe Aryans, and the treasure-house of their Ancient 
: His historical achievements are mostly concerned 
with the Aryanising of the South of India, by leading 
down and establishing colonies of Brihmanas from the 
North, many centuries B.c., after the migrations of the 
first Aryans from Central Asia to India between 18,875 
B.C. and 9,700 B.C. as stated before. These Brahmanas lived 
under the protection of the Dravidian Kings, the Rishi 
Agastya Himself being named the Royal Priest of the 
Pandyas. In this capacity He compiled the first Tamil 
Grammar, giving literary form to the rude Dravidian 
dialect and much enlarging its scope. He founded and 
presided over the first Tamil Academy, at Madura, probably 
mamed after the Northern Mathura. This Madura was 
destroyed by a flood, but a second Academy grew up and 
flourished, also under His presidency, though several 
centuries later, not far from modern Madura. Thus acting 
directly through a continuous physical incarnation or 
influencing the course of events more subtly through His 
disciples, it was Rishi Agastya who shaped Tami! Culture. 

The name of the Pandya King, who was advised by 
the Rishi Agastya, means “ He who survived the flood ” ; 
and several legends show that the Rishi was actively con- 
cerned in the shaping of India after the great cataclysm 
which sank the greater part of Lanka, leaving only Ceylon, 
while raising the Himalayas and the northern plains. 

This Great One to whom the name Jupiter was 
assigned in the book Man: Whence, How and Whither, 
is deeply absorbed in the abstruser sciences of which 
Chemistry and Astronomy are the outer shells, and lives 
near Tiruvallum, about eighty miles from Adyar, Madras, 
where He may be approached by the few who know—and 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM ‘403 


was so visited by Bishop C. W. Leadbeater and Swami 
T. Subba Row in His Nilgiri retreat—though the idly 
curious find themselves somehow thwarted in all attempts 
to intrude on His privacy. He diverges slightly from 
what may, with all reverence, be called the usual type of 
the physical body of the Adept. Says Bishop Leadbeater : 
‘‘He is shorter than most members of the Brotherhood 
and is the only One of Them, so far as I am aware, whose 
hair shows streaks of grey. He holds Himself very upe 
right and moves with alertness and military precision. He 
is a landed proprietor, and during the visit which I paid 
to Him with Swami T. Subba Row, I saw Him several 
times transacting business with men who appeared to be 
foremen, bringing reports to Him and receiving instruc- 
tions.” 

11. The Master M. (Morya).—It was the Master Morya, 
the Lieutenant and destined Successor of the Lord Vaivas- 
vata Manu, and the future Manu of the sixth root-race, 
who with Master Kuthumi founded the Theosophical 
Society through H. P. Blavatsky and H. S. Olcott, both 
disciples of Master M. He has almost always been a ruler 
in past lives, and now wears an Indian body and lives in 
Tibet near Shigatse, at a little distance from the house of 
His Brother, the Master Kuthumi. He isa Rajput King by 
birth, and has a dark beard divided into two parts, dark, 
almost black, hair falling to His shoulders, and dark 
and piercing eyes, full of power. He is six feet six inches 
in height, and bears Himself like a soldier, speaking in 
short terse sentences as if He were accustomed to being 
instantly obeyed. He is generally dressed in white and 
wears a turban. He appears to be a man absolutely in 
the prime of life—possibly thirty-five or forty years of 
age; yet many of the stories which His pupils tell of Him 


404 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


assign to Him an age four or five times greater than that, 
and Madame Blavatsky said that when she first saw Him 
in her childhood He appeared to her exactly the same as 
at the present time. She also often described how she 
met Him in Hyde Park, London, in the year 1851, when 
He came over with a number of other Indian Princes to 
attend the first great International Exhibition. 

In the presence of the Master Morya, who is a 
Representative of the First Ray at the level of Chohan 
Initiation, there is a sense of overwhelming power and 
strength, and He has an imperious dignity that compels 
the deepest reverence. 

12. The Master K. H. (Kuthumi)—Very often a 
priest or teacher in past lives, He was the Egyptian priest 
Sarthon; Chief Priest of a Temple at Agade in Asia 
Minor, about 1,530 b.c.; the great philosopher Pythagoras, 
about 600 B.c.; the flamen (Priest) of the Temple of 
Jupiter in Rome during the reign of Tiberius; also 
Nagarjuna, the Buddhist teacher, about A.D. 170. 

The Master Kuthumi wears the body of a Kashmiri 
Brahmana, and “is as fair in complexion as the average 
Englishman. He, too, has flowing hair, and His eyes are 
blue and full of joy and love. His hair and beard are 
brown, which, as the sunlight catches them, become ruddy 
with glints of gold. His face is somewhat hard to de- 
scribe, for His expression is ever changing as He smiles ; 
the nose is finely chiselled, and the eyes are large and of a 
wonderful liquid blue”. He generally wears white clothes, 
but is not seen wearing a head-dress of any kind, except 
on the rare occasions when He assumes the yellow robe of 
the Gelugpa sect or clan, which includes a hood somewhat 
of the shape of the Roman helmet. He has the appear- 
ance of being about the same age as His constant friend 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 405 


and companion, the Master Morya; yet it has been said 
that He took a University Degree in Europe just before 
the middle of last century, which would certainly make 
Him something very like a centenarian. 

The Master is a great linguist, and besides being a 
fine English scholar has a thorough knowledge of French 
and German. He has composed some music, and has 
written notes and papers for various purposes. He is also 
much interested in the growth of physical science, although 
this is especially the province of one of the other great 
Masters of the Wisdom. 

The Masters Morya and Kuthumi occupy houses 
on opposite sides of a narrow ravine, near Shigatse in 
Tibet, the slopes of which are covered with pine trees, and 
at the bottom flows a small stream. Paths run down the 
ravine past Their houses, and meet at the bottom, where 
there is a little bridge. Close to the bridge a narrow 
Opening leads to a system of vast subterranean halls 
containing an occult museum, the contents of which appear 
to be intended as a kind of illustration of the whole 
process of evolution and of which the Master Kuthumi is 
the Guardian on behalf of the Great White Brotherhood. 

In the vestibule leading to these vast halls are kept 
the living images, to be explained presently, of those pupils 
of the Masters Morya and Kuthumi who happen at the 
time to be on Probation. These images are ranged round 
the walls like statues, and are perfect representations of 
the pupils concerned. It is not probable, however, that 
they are visible to physical eyes, for the lowest matter 
entering into their composition is etheric. 

A rough and uneven track leads down the valley by 
the side of the stream. From either of the two houses of 
the Masters the other house can be seen. These houses, 


406 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


which are of stone, very heavily and strongly built, are 
both above the bridge, but it is doubtful whether both 
could be seen from it, since the ravine bends round. If 
the path be followed up the valley, which faces south, past 
the house of the Master Kuthumi it leads to a large pillar 
of rock, beyond which, the ravine bending round, it passes 
out of sight. Some distance further on, the ravine opens 
out into a plateau on which there Is a lake. 

The Master has a large garden of Hisown. He 
possesses, too, a quantity of land, and employs labourers 
to cultivate it. Near the house there are flowering shrubs 
and masses of flowers growing freely, with ferns among 
them. Through the garden there flows a streamlet, which 
forms a little waterfall, and over it a tiny bridge is built. 
“ Here He often sits when He is sending out streams of 
thought and benediction upon His people; it would no 
doubt appear to the casual] observer as though He were 
sitting idly watching Nature, and listening heedlessly to 
the song of the birds, and to the splash and tumble of the 
water. Sometimes, too, He sits in His great armchair, 
and when His people see Him thus, they know that He 
must not be disturbed; they do not know exactly what 
He is doing, but suppose Him to be in samadhi. The 
fact that people in the East understand this kind of 
meditation and respect it may be one of the reasons why 
the Adepts prefer to live there rather than in the West.” 

Every morning a number of people—not exactly 
pupils, but followers—come to the Master’s house, and sit 
on the verandah and outside it. Sometimes He gives 
them a little talk—a sort of lecturette ; but more often He 
goes on with His work and takes no notice of them beyond 
a friendly smile, with which they seem equally contented. 
They evidently come to sit in His aura and venerate Him. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 407 


Of the Master’s family but little is known. There isa 
lady, evidently a pupil, whom He calls ‘sister’. Whether 
she is actually His sister or not is not known; she might 
possibly be a cousin or a niece. She looks much older 
than He, but that would not make the relationship im- 
probable, as He has appeared of about the same age for a 
long time. Her principal work seems to be to look after the 
housekeeping and manage the servants. Among the latter 
are an old man and his wife, who have been for a long 
time in the Master’s service. They do not know anything 
of the real dignity of their employer, but regard Him asa 
very indulgent and gracious patron, and naturally they 
benefit greatly by being in His service. 

From time to time the Master Kuthumi rides on a 
big bay horse, and occasionally, when Their work lies 
together, He is accompanied by the Master Morya, who 
always rides a magnificent white horse. The former 
regularly visits some of the monasteries, and sometimes 
goes up a great pass to a lonely monastery in the hills, 
Riding in the course of His duties seems to be His prin- 
cipal exercise, but He sometimes walks with the Master 
Djwal Kul, who lives quite near to the great crag which 
gives a view of the lake. 

The union of pupil with Master is closer than any 
tie imaginable on earth; closer still, because at a higher 
level, was that between the Master Kuthumi and His 
Teacher, the Master Dhruva, who was in His turn a pupil 
of the Lord Maitreya, during the time when the latter took 
pupils. Thereby the Master Kuthumi also became one 
with the Lord Maitreya, and as at Their level unity is still 
more perfect, the Master Kuthumi is one with the Bodhi- 
sattva in a very wonderful way. He is the Assistant and 
destined Successor of the World-Teacher just as the 


408 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Master Morya is the Assistant and destined Successor of 
the Lord Vaivasvata Manu. In the person of the Master 
Kuthumi, as in that of His Chief, the Lord Maitreya, the 
influence that is especially noticeable is the radiance of 
His all-embracing Love. The Representative of the 
Second Ray on the level of Chohan Initiation at present, 
many centuries hence He will succeed the great Lord 
in His high Office, and assuming the sceptre of the 
World-Teacher, become the Bodhisattva of the sixth 
root-race. 

13. The ‘ Venetian” Master.—At the Head of the 
Third Ray stands the great Master, the Venetian Chohan, 
so called because by birth He is a Venetian. In the people 
of that Ray the characteristic of Adaptability appears 
very strongly, and those who are advanced on this Ray 
have a great deal of tact and a rare faculty of doing the 
right thing at the right moment. 

Perhaps the Venetian Chohan is the handsomest of 
all the Members of the Brotherhood. He is very tall— 
about six feet five inches, and has a flowing beard and 
golden hair somewhat like those of the Manu; and His 
eyes are blue. Although He was born in Venice, His 
family undoubtedly has Gothic blood in its veins, for He ts 
a man distinctly of that type. 

14. The Master “ Serapis .—The Fourth Ray is under 
the care of the Master Serapis, and so the special line of 
this Chohan is Harmony and Beauty. He helped and 
taught Colonel Olcott in the early days of the Theosophical 
Society, when his own Master, the Master Morya, was 
otherwise engaged for a time. 

| The Master Serapis is tall, and fair in complexion. 
He is a Greek by birth, though all His work has been done 
in Egypt and in connection with the Egyptian Lodge. He 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 409 


is very distinguished and ascetic in face, somewhat 
resembling the late Cardinal Newman. 

15. The Master Hilarion.—Once Iamblichus of the 
Neo-Platonic School, the Master Hilarion gave through 
Mabel Collins The Light on the Path and through H. P. 
Blavatsky The Voice of the Silence, and is a “skilled 
craftsman in poetic English prose and in melodious 
utterance’’. As the Head of the Fifth Ray, this Chohan 
influences most of the great scientists of the world by His 
splendid quality of scientific accuracy. Of course, His 
science extends beyond what is commonly called by that 
name, and He works with many of the forces which Nature 
introduces into the life of man. 

Though living in Egypt, the Master Hilarion is a 
Greek and, except that He has a slightly aquiline nose, is 
of the ancient Greek type. His forehead is low and broad, 
and resembles that of the Hermes of Praxiteles. He, too, 
is wonderfully handsome, and looks rather younger than 
most of the Adepts. 

16. The Master Jesus.—He was a disciple two thousand 
years ago, when at the age of thirty, after His Baptism, 
the Spirit of God descended upon Him, and He surren- 
dered His pure body to the Christ. He was born again as 
Apollonius of Tyana, sometimes called the Pagan Christ, 
in the year’ one of the Christian era, and attained Adept- 
ship in that incarnation. Taking up the Work, He then 
travelled far and wide as a Messenger of the Great White 
Lodge, and made in various places in Europe centres of 
occult force to be used long afterwards when again the 
Great Teacher should appear. Those secret centres, 
existing as they do in Europe, and having physical objects 
(talismans) buried thereat, linked to Jesus in His causal 


body with their influence consequently lasting through the 
62 


410 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


ages, are the various points of future importance, whence 
the Light shall spread, and whence the Teaching shall go 
forth. He again appeared in Southern India as the 
teacher Ramdanujacharya to revive the devotional element 
in Hinduism in the eleventh century A.D. 

The Chohan Jesus rules the Sixth Ray, that of 
Bhakti or Devotion. This is the Ray of the devotional 
saints and mystics of every religion, and this Master has 
charge of such people under whatever form they may 
worship the Divine Being. He is the Master of devotees, 
and the key-note of His Presence is an intense purity, and 
a fiery type of devotion that brooks no obstacles. He has 
the Christian religion as His special charge, and the 
Spiritual forces liberated during Christian ceremonials 
come directly through Him. He now wears a Syrian 
body, has the dark skin, dark eyes and black beard of the 
Arab, and generally wears white robes and a turban. He 
lives amongst the Druses of Mount Lebanon, and is just 
now flooding His Church with the Mystic Christianity so 
noticeable in these days. 

17. The Master Rakoczi.—This last survivor of the 
Royal House of Rakoczi, known in France as Comte 
de S. Germain in the history of the eighteenth century, 
was born in that century in Hungary and is, we are told, 
known to some in that same body. 

In his first life of historical importance he belonged 
to a noble Roman family and was known as St. Alban, 
having suffered martyrdom in the great persecution of the 
Emperor Diocletian early in the fourth century at the 
town of his birthplace, Verulam in England, now called 
St. Albans after him. Verulam was at that time the 
capital of Roman England, though it is now but a small 
place. Soon after that he had another very important 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 41z 


incarnation in Constantinople in the year A.D. 411 when 
under the name of Proclus, which in after life he was 
destined to make famous, he was one of the last expo- 
nents of Neo-Platonism and overshadowed the medieval 
Christian Church with his influence. 

The next thing that is definitely known of him at 
present is that he was reborn in the year 1211, and in that 
life as Roger Bacon, a Franciscan friar and a great 
experimentalist and scientist, he was a reformer both of 
the theology and science of his day. In 1375 came his 
birth as Christian Rosengreufz, a birth of very great 
importance, for he founded the great secret society of the 
Rosicrucians, which, though supposed to have died out, is 
still in existence, while its teaching is found in a somewhat 
different form in Theosophy and partly in Freemasonry. 
He again took birth some fifty years later as John 
Hunyadi, an eminent Hungarian soldier and leader, and 
again about A.D. 1500 he had a life as the monk Robertus 
somewhere in middle Europe. After that comes one of 
the very greatest of his births when in the year 1561 he 
was born as Francis Bacon. In fact, as known largely by 
means of a cipher story written by him secretly in the 
works which he published, he was the first son of no less a 
personage than Queen Elizabeth, who had married Sir 
Robert Dudley, afterwards the Earl of Leicester, when 
they were both prisoners in the Tower. That marriage 
having been legalised at a later time, he should have been 
King of England instead of James I, but owing to various 
reasons he had bound himself by a pledge to his mother 
not to let the fact he known. He set to work to constitute 
the English language as we know it to-day, and that he 
did largely by writing those plays attributed to Shakespeare 
(Shakespeare is proved to have been an illiterate man who 


412 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


could not spell his name in the same way two or three 
times consecutively), and also, perhaps chiefly, by editing 
the authorised version of the Bible, which was then being 
translated by a committee of forty-eight under the direc- 
tion of King James I. 

- A century later he is said to have taken birth as 
Ivan Rakoczi, a prince of Transylvania. He was the 
Comte de St. Germain at the time of the French Revolu- 
tion. He was also Baron Hompesch, or he may have 
disguised himself as Baron Hompesch, for they belong 
almost to the same period. Hompesch was the last of the 
knights of St. John of Malta, who arranged to transfer the 
Island of Malta to the English. 

A disciple through many laborious lives, but now a 
Master, this ‘‘ Hungarian Adept”’ of The Occult World 
still lives in a body which has no appearance of great age 
and it is known that He still uses the name ‘ Rakoczi ’ 
sometimes. But beyond that considerable mystery 
surrounds His movements. He moves about Europe 
incognito and turns up at intervals, but what He does 
in the interim is not known. He is in charge 
of a great deal of work in Europe, and is also the 
Head of the Seventh or Ceremonial Ray, the in- 
fluence of which, superseding that of Devotion—the 
Sixth Ray—is now gradually spreading all over the 
world. Naturally he is deeply interested both in the work 
of the Christian Church and in Freemasonry (and Co- 
masonry)—cults which are in reality two expressions of 
the same eternal truth, though they are popularly supposed 
to be diametrically opposed—and is also much concerned 
with the political situation in Europe, and the growth of 
modern physical science. He works to a large extent 
through ceremonial magic, and employs the services of 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 413 


great Angels who obey Him implicitly and lovingly. 
Though He speaks all European and many Oriental 
languages, much of His working is in Latin, the language 
which is the special vehicle of His thought. He hasa 
suit of golden chain-mail, which once belonged to a Roman 
Emperor, and in His various rituals He wears wonderful 
and many-coloured robes and jewels. 

The Master the Comte de St. Germain resembles 
the Mahadchohin in many ways. Though He is not 
especially tall, He is very upright and military in His 
bearing, and He has the exquisite courtesy and dignity of 
a grand seigneur of the eighteenth century. His eyes are 
large and brown, and are filled with tenderness and 
humour, though there 1s in them a glint of power; and the 
splendour of His Presence impels men to make obeisance. 
His face is olive-tanned; His close-cut brown hair is 
parted in the centre and brushed back frorn the forehead, 
and He has a short and pointed beard. Often He wearsa 
dark uniform with facings of gold lace—often also a 
magnificent red military cloak—and these accentuate His 
soldier-like appearance. He travels much though He 
usually resides in an ancient castle in Hungary that has 
belonged to His family for many centuries. He was met 
physically in Rome in A.D. 1901 by Bishop Leadbeater 
who had a long conversation with Him. 

18. The Master D. K. (Djwdl Kul).—He was formerly 
the philosopher Kleinias, a disciple of Pythagoras in Greece, 
and was later the Buddhist teacher Aryasanga, about 
A.D. 600. 

The body of this Master, like that of the Nilgiri 
Master, diverges slightly from what may be called the 
usual type of the physical body of the Adept. He is still 
wearing the same body in which He attained Adeptship 


4x4 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


only a few years ago, and perhaps for that reason it has 
not been possible to make that body a perfect reproduction 
of the Augoeides. His face is distinctly Tibetan in 
character, with high cheek bones, and is somewhat rugged 
in appearance, showing signs of age. In order that He 
might have an abiding-place quite near to the Master 
Kuthumi—His own Master—He constructed for Himself 
with His own hands, in the days of His pupilage, a small 
hut or cabin, further up the hill, near to the great crag, 
mentioned before, ata little distance from the house and 
grounds of His Master, on the left bank of the stream 
running between the houses of the Masters Morya and 
Kuthumi. 

19, 20.—Those who in Their last earth-lives were 
known as Sir Thomas More and Thomas Vaughan are 
also now Masters. 

These are some of the Great Ones publicly known, 
living in different countries scattered over the world. 
Beyond the necessity of birth, when one body is worn out 
They (with the exception of the Four Kumaras) choose 
another wherein it may be most convenient to work, not 
attaching any importance to the nationality of the body, 
though the body will be usually splendidly handsome and 
always perfectly healthy, while again a new body taken in 
a subsequent incarnation will be almost an exact re- 
production of the old one. Moreover, owing to perfect 
health and absence of worry, They are able to preserve 
Their physical bodies much longer than we can. Our 
bodies grow old and die for various reasons, from inherited 
weakness, disease, accident and self-indulgence, worry and 
overwork. But in the case of an Adept none of these 
causes is present, though we must of course remember that 
His body is fit for work and capable of endurance 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 415 


immeasurably beyond those of ordinary men. Almost 
all the Masters of whom we know appear as men in the 
prime of life, yet in many cases there is testimony, as stat- 
ed before, to prove that Their physical bodies must have 
long passed the ordinary age of man. 

Sometimes an Adept for some special purpose wants 
a body to use temporarily amid the bustle of the world. 
That will be the case when the World-Teacher comes, 
and we have been told that several other Adepts also may 
then appear, to act as His Lieutenants and assist Him in 
His great work for humanity. Most of the Great Ones 
will follow the example of Their Chief, and borrow 
temporarily the bodies of Their pupils, so it is necessary 
that a certain number of such vehicles should be ready for 
Their use. 

Q. But, since the Adepts have physical bodies of Their 
own, why will They need others on the occasion of the 
coming of the World-Teacher ? 

Ans. Those who, attaining the level of Adeptship, 
choose as Their future career to remain upon this world 
and help directly in the evolution of Their own humanity, 
find it convenient for Their work to retain physical bodies. 
In order to be suitable for Their purposes, these bodies 
must be of no ordinary kind. Not only must they be 
absolutely sound in health, but they must also be perfect 
expressions of as much of the ego as can be manifested on 
the physical plane. 

The building up of such a body as this is no light 
task. When the ego of an ordinary man comes down to 
his new baby body, he finds it in charge of an artificial 
elemental, which has been created according to his karma. 
This elemental is industriously occupied in modelling the 
form which is soon to be born in the outer world, and it 


416 _ THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


remains after birth and continues that moulding process 
usually until the body is six or seven years old. During 
this period the ego is gradually acquiring closer contact 
with his new vehicles, emotional and mental as well as 
physical, and is becoming accustomed to them; but the 
actual work done by himself upon these new vehicles up 
to the point at which the elemental withdraws is, in 
most cases, inconsiderable. He is certainly in connection 
with the body, but generally pays but little attention to it, 
preferring to wait until it has reached a stage where it is 
more responsive to his efforts. 

The case of an Adept is very different from this. As 
there is no evil karma to be worked out, no artificial 
elemental is at work, and the ego himself is in sole charge 
of the development of the body from the beginning, finding 
himself limited only by its heredity. This enables a far 
more refined and delicate instrument to be produced, but 
it also involves more trouble for the ego, and engages for 
some years a considerable amount of his time and energy. 
In consequence of this, and no doubt for other reasons as 
well, an Adept does not wish to repeat the process more 
often than is strictly necessary, and He therefore makes 
His physical body last as long as possible. 

A body thus made suitable for higher work is 
inevitably a sensitive one, and for that very reason it 
requires careful treatment if it is to be always at its best. 
It would wear out as ours do if it were subjected to the 
innumerable petty frictions of the outer world, and its 
constant torrent of unsympathetic vibrations. Therefore 
the Great Ones usually live in comparative seclusion, and 
appear but rarely in that cyclonic chaos which we call 
daily life. If They were to bring Their bodies into the 
whirl of curiosity and vehement emotion which is likely to 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 417 


surround the World-Teacher when He comes, there can 
be no doubt that the life of these bodies would be greatly 
shortened, and also, because of their extreme sensitiveness, 
there would be much unnecessary suffering. 

By temporarily occupying the body of a pupil, the 
Adept avoids these inconveniences, and at the same time 
gives an incalculable impetus to the pupil’s evolution. 
He inhabits the vehicle only when He needs it—to deliver 
a lecture, perhaps, or to pour a special flood of blessing ; 
and as soon as He has done what He wishes, He steps 
out of the body, and the pupil, who has all the while 
been in attendance, resumes it, as the Adept goes back to 
His own proper vehicle to continue His usual work for 
the helping of the world. In this way His regular 
business is but little affected, yet He has always at His 
disposal a body through which He can co-operate, when 
required, on the physical plane, in the beatific mission 
of the World-Teacher. 

This plan of borrowing a suitable body is always 
adopted by the Great Ones when They think it well to 
descend among men, under conditions such as those which 
now obtain in the world. The Lord Gautama employed 
it when He came as the original Zoroaster, 29,700 B.c., 
taking the body of the second son (our present Master 
K. H.) of the then king of Persia (our present Master 
M.), and also when He came, twenty-five centuries ago, 
to attain Buddhahood, and the Lord Maitreya took 
the same course when He visited Palestine two thousand 
years ago. The only exception is that when a new 
Bodhisattva assumes the Office of World-Teacher after 
His predecessor has become the Buddha, on His first 
appearance in the world in that capacity He takes birth 


as a little child in the ordinary way, as was done by the 
58 


418 | THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


present Bodhisattva, when He took birth as Shri Krishna 
on the glowing plains of India, as stated before. 

The number of Adepts who retain physical bodies 
to help the evolution of the world is small, about fifty or 
sixty, but the great majority even among These do not 
take pupils, as They are engaged in quite other work. 

Q. Whatis the work of the Masters ? 

Ans. In countless ways They help the progress of 
humanity. From the highest sphere Their light pours 
down in general benediction like the light of the sun, 
illuminating and blessing all. A man may open the 
windows of his room and let the sunshine flood the room. 
Similarly, anyone may open the windows of his soul to 
let his spirit be flooded with Their light and strength in 
proportion to his receptivity. 

Then there are general organisations, religious 
communities, into which a special Master will pour down 
His blessings, strength and spiritual energy. Great 
religions are like mighty reservoirs or great vessels of 
different shapes and forms, all containing the one spiritual 
water for the quenching of the spiritual thirst of man. 

Next comes the great intellectual work on the 
higher mental plane where the Masters help the world of 
thought. by raining down noble ideals, inspiring thoughts, 
devotional aspirations and streams of intellectual help on 
all men, whereby a discovery flashes into the mind of a 
patient searcher after truth, or the answer to a long- 
studied problem illumines the intellect of a lofty phi- 
losopher. Thus great thoughts of beauty will enter the 
mind of a genius in art, or thoughts of patriotism be 
received by a political genius. On the same higher mental 
plane They impress more liberal ideas upon great 
preachers and teachers, and send Their wishes to Their 


THE MASTERS AND. THE WAY TO THEM 419 


disciples about the work they should do. On the lower 
mental plane They teach those who are in the heavenly 
world and generate thought-forms to influence the 
concrete mind and guide it along useful lines of physical 
activity. 

In the astral world They have the helping of the 
dead, general supervision of the teaching of pupils and 
the sending of aid in numerous cases of need, while in 
the physical world They watch the tendency of events 
and neutralise, as far as the Law permits, the undesira- 
ble currents, strengthening the good and weakening 
the evil. 

They work also with the Angels of Nations and 
guide the spiritual forces as the latter guide the material 
ones, choosing or rejecting actors in the mighty Work, 
influencing kings, statesmen and councils of men. Again, 
They stand as a Guardian Wall around humanity, within 
which it can evolve without being crushed by the tre- 
mendous cosmic forces which play around our planet. 
From time to time one of Them comes forth into the 
world of men as a great religious teacher or prophet to 
spread a new form of the Eternal Verities, suited to the 
need and capacity of the people of the time or to the 
Civilisation of a new race. 

Though the number of Adepts is small, They have 
arranged that in all the world no life shall be disregarded 
or neglected ; so They have divided the earth into special 
areas in somewhat the same way as in older countries 
the Christian Church has divided the whole land into 
parishes. The parishes of the Adepts, however, are not 
country districts or parts of towns, but huge countries 
and even continents. As the world is at present divided, 
one great Adept may be said to be in charge of Europe, 


420 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


and another looks after India; and thus the whole world 
is parcelled out. The parishes do not follow our politica] 
or geographical boundaries, but within His territory the 
Adept has all the different grades and forms of evolution 
to regard—not only the human kingdom, but also the 
kingdoms of the Angels, the various classes of nature- 
spirits, and the animals, vegetables and minerals beneath 
us, as well as the kingdoms of the elemental essence and 
many others of which so far nothing has been heard 
by mankind ; so there is a vast amount of work to be 
accomplished. 

A large part of the Adepts’ work lies at levels far 
beyond the physical, as They are engaged in pouring 
out Their own power, and also the force from the great 
store filled. by the Nirmanakaya. The Great Ones also 
take advantage of the ceremonies of all religions to pour 
out Their power over the world on the lower planes, and 
thus to stimulate in as many men as possible the spiritual 
growth of which each 1s capable. But it is not only 
in connection with religious ceremonial that this ts done, 
for the Brocherhood makes use of every opportunity that 
offers. If there be a gathering of people or pilgrims who 
are all under the influence of devotion, all bent for the 
time being upon nobler and higher thought, such a 
gathering offers to the Adepts an unusual opportunity, 
since it forms a focus which They can employ as a channel 
for spiritual influence. 

But the activities on the lower planes are mainly 
entrusted to Their disciples. They Themselves deal 
rather with the egos in their causal bodies and devote 
Themselves to pouring spiritual influence upon them, 
thereby evoking from them all that is noblest and most 


beneficial for their growth. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 441 


Normally, although incarnate, the Members of the 
Occult Hierarchy remain in retired and secluded spots in 
order that They may carry on the helpful work which 
would be impossible of accomplishment in the crowded 
haunts of men and the tumult of human life. But at 
certain times in human history, in serious crises, Masters 
and even loftier Beings, come out into the world of men. 

Q. Then why does an Adept, whose work seems to lie 
almost entirely on higher planes, need a physical body 
at all? 

Ans. It is really no concern of ours, but if speculation 
on such a matter be not irreverent, various reasons suggest 
themselves. The Adept spends much of His time in 
projecting streams of influence, and while, so far as has 
been observed, these are most often on the higher mental 
level, or on the plane above that, it is probable that they 
may sometimes at least be etheric currents, and for the 
manipulation of these the possession of a physical body is 
undoubtedly an advantage. Again, most of the Masters 
have a few pupils or assistants who live with or near 
Them on the physical plane, and a physical body may be 
necessary for their sake. Of this we may be certain, that 
if an Adept chooses to take the trouble to maintain such 
a body, He has a good reason for it; for enough of Their 
methods of working is known for us to be assured that 
They always do everything in the best way, and by the 
means which involve the least expenditure of energy. 

Q. But with so much power and wisdom why don’t the 
Masters take more pupils ? Why do They withhold know- 
ledge ? Why do They not remove crime and misery from 
the world 7? 

Ans. They are waiting and waiting with tireless 
patience to find some human heart opening itself out, 


422 ‘THROSOPHY EXPLAINED 


someone willing to be taught. But people’s hearts are 
fast closed against Them with the lock of gold, of power, 
of fame, of sloth and indifference, of sin and worldly 
enjoyment; and unless they are unlocked, the Teacher 
waiting outside cannot cross the threshold and illuminate 
the mind. “ Without Him,” says a newly-chosen pupil, “ I 
could have done nothing, but through His help I have 
been able to succeed.” Only it should be remembered 
that help is ready and waiting for every one ; therefore 
whenever there is any delay, it is on the side of the pupil 
that the difficulty lies, never on His. Much as a man may 
desire to find his Teacher, the Teacher is a thousandfold 
more constant in His desire to find him, because many 
are wanted, while only a few are found, who, being 
trained, may go out into the world to help suffering 
humanity. 

Thus the Teachers do not withhold knowledge 
because They grudge the giving, but They are hampered 
by the want of receptivity, by the closing of the heart. 
They cannot force humanity along any line of progress, 
though They help when the slightest opportunity is offered. 
If They bent our wills to Theirs, civilisation would be 
more perfect than now, but we should be only like obedient 
children instead of developing strength and initiative of 
self-reliant manhood. 

Again, no cure of misery can be permanent so long 
as the cause of the mischief is kept going. The miseries 
growing out of men’s selfishness can be removed perma- 
nently only by striking at the root of causes. The root of 
all evil is ignorance, as already stated at the end of 
Chapter I, and the Masters are always ready to teach 
if only They find persons willing to be taught. ‘“ For 
when the disciple is ready, the Master is ready also.” 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 423 


‘Therefore in the hall of learning, when he is capable of 
entering there, the disciple will always find his Master.” 

Q. If the Masters have such great speritual powers, 
why do They permit the conquest and humsliation of Thetr 
countrees like Egypt and India? 

Ans. It has already been said that Masters are of 
many races, and that They seek to aid the progress of 
men of all races spiritually rather than materially. More- 
over, They are Themselves obedient to the Law, and 
cannot interfere with the karma of nations. They help 
those who are willing, by suggestion, warning or encourage- 
ment, but cannot take into Their hands the destiny of 
persons or nations. Again, the races have to develop, not 
into puppets pulled by strings in Masters’ hands, but into 
self-reliant entities by lessons of experience according to 
karmic laws and by a freedom of choice which is a dawn- 
ing manifestation of the God within. 

Q. If an ordinary man met a Master on the physical 
plane, would he recognise Him as such ? 

Ans. Very probably not. He would certainly know 
that he was in the presence of one who was impressive, 
noble and dignified with a serenity and benevolence ex- 
pressing the peace within, but there would be no external 
peculiarity by which he could divine the fact that the man 
was an Adept. A Master would be more silent than most, 
for He does not waste His force in idle conversation, and 
speaks only with the definite purpose of encouraging and 
helping or warning. He would be seen to be wise and 
kindly, and to have a keen sense of humour. But to know 
Him as an Adept, it would be necessary to see His causal 
body with its greatly increased size—His enormous aura 
which in many cases extends a mile or more on 
all sides of Him—its all-round development and its 


fa4 lt EROSOPHY EXPLAINED | 


‘special arrangement of colours. It is a law in nature 
‘that ‘we can only recognise that to which we can respond, 
only recognise in proportion as we reproduce, and as 
Meterlinck puts it: “it is only by revealing the divine 
that is in us, that we may discover the divine in others”, 
So an ordinary man who has not yet unfolded divinity in 
himself, though certainly impressed by the physical 
presence of the Master, will not recognise His occult 
powers. 

Q. How ts a man brought to the portals of the Path, to 
the beginning of the path of spiritual development ? 

Ans. According to the eastern books there are four 
such means: 

1. Sat-sang—companionship of those who have 
already entered upon the Path. The influence exerted 
by one who is already on the Path is not in any 
sort limited by the teaching which he gives. It is 
the influence of the life, the influence of the vi- 
brations radiating from him, that is so powerful. The 
principal thing is that the disciple shall be with the teacher. 
In India, if the teacher be a peripatetic philosopher—as so 
many of them are—if he wanders from place to place, his 
band of followers or disciples goes about with him, just as 
the disciples of Jesus travelled with Him through 
Palestine. And that is entirely scientific. The aura of 
the teacher—his higher vehicles generally—is keyed up to 
a somewhat higher rate of vibration than the auras of his 
pupils. Therefore his mere proximity acts upon their 
vehicles and helps them to vibrate at a rate similar to his 
own. Thus by living always in the aura of a less worldly 
man the pupils themselves become less worldly than they 
otherwise could. The higher vibration being quite con- 
stant in its pressure, the disciples, whether awake oF 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 425 


asleep, are in close contact with it and are absorbing it 
with a consequent change in their character. In ordinary 
physics we know that the stronger vibration will dominate 
the weaker, and the same is the case on the higher planes. 
So it has always been recognised that the actual presence 
of the teacher counts for enormously more than the words 
he can say, and helps the pupil rapidly to change his 
character—a slow and tedious business ordinarily, yet a 
thing quite necessary for one who wishes to enter the Path. 

2. Shravana—hearing or reading of definite 
teaching on occult philosophy. It may happen that a 
man may hear or read a teaching of this kind which will 
commend itself to his intuition, and then he will naturally 
seek to satisfy his desire to find out more about it. This 
is a result of previous karma, of karma in a previous life. 
He has already come in contact with the truth and 
convinced himself of its beauty and reality in another life, 
and so when it comes before him in this life, he knows it 
is true. There may be hundreds and thousands who may 
hear and read the same teaching and yet may not receive 
any impulse from it. It simply means that these latter 
are atastage when it is all foreign to them and therefore 
does not awaken in them the response that it awakens in 
those who have the good karma of having understood it 
before and are therefore able to see in it that which they 
have brought with them the power to see. 

3. Manana—enlightened reflection. By sheer 
force of hard thinking and close reasoning a man may 
arrive at the truth and solve the riddle of life. He may 
come to see that there must be a Plan of Evolution, that 
there must be Those who know all about it, the evolved 
and perfected Men, and that there must be a Path by 


which They may be reached. And the man who comes to 
64 


426 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


that decision of course sets out to look for the Path and 
find his way to the Great Ones. Those who travel by 
this Path are probably few, but the thing is a possibility. 
4. Nididhyaisana—practice of virtue through 
“meditation”. It should be remembered that though 
the practice of virtue leads to the commencement of 
the Path, it is by no means the end of it, as the 
average Christian is apt to believe. In the early days 
of Christianity, Purification—or Saintship which they 
now set before themselves as their goal—was only the 
first step. The early Christian teachers certainly held 
that it was a man’s duty to become a saint; but at the 
same time they held that it was the first stage only ; and 
S. Clement of Alexandria, who was in many respects the 
greatest of the early Fathers of the Church, speaks rather 
slightingly of that stage. ‘“ Purity, why, it is only a 
negative state and is valuable chiefly as a condition of 
insight.”” The chief use of being pure is that unlessa 
man is pure he cannot see clearly. The thing itself is 
merely negative. Being good is in itself only a condition, 
necessary for further progress. A man must become a 
saint, but after he has become a saint, he has to begin 
to attain the second stage of Illumination. This was 
what S. Peter meant when he said to his pupils: 
** Add to your faith, knowledge.’’ Only those who had 
fully gained that illumination with arduous labour were 
allowed to pass into the third stage of Initiation. S. Paul 
said: “ We speak wisdom among those that are perfect,’ 
and the word ‘perfect’ here implies a certain level of 
occult progress. In every Occult School there are 
things which can only be spoken to those of the higher 
degrees, others which can only be spoken to those who 
are pupils of the Master. So in early Christianity there 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 427 


were those three terms used, Purification, Illumination and 
Perfection. 

Now the statement that the practice of virtue leads 
a man to the beginning of the Path seems like going back 
to the old theory : “‘ Be good and you willbe happy.” But 
in reality it means that though the man who leads a good 
life through many incarnations may not thereby develop 
intellect, be will presently acquire sufficient intuition to 
carry him into the presence of the people who do know, to 
bring him in fact to the feet of someone who is a servant 
of the Master. But this method takes thousands of years 
and many lives. The man who practises virtue and 
does not do anything else will reach the portals of the 
Path eventually, but it is a slow process. He can hasten 
his progress and save himself much time by following 
S. Peter’s advice and acquiring knowledge; for then his 
progress will be much swifter. 

When by any of these methods a man reaches a 
certain level, he inevitably attracts the attention of the 
Masters and comes into contact with Them, usually 
through one or other of Their advanced pupils. 

Q. How, then, does the Theosophical Society help an 
asptrant in his approach to the Path ? 

Ans. It happens that, in lands which have only the 
European culture, almost the only way in which a man can 
get the inner teaching put clearly before him is by coming 
into the Theosophical Society, or by reading Theosophical 
works. There have been mystical or spiritualistic works 
which have given some information, which have gone a 
long way, but there are none which state the case so clear- 
ly, so scientifically, as the Theosophical literature has done. 

Human progress is slow, but it is constant ; there- 
fore the number of the Perfected Men is increasing, and 


428 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


the possibility of attaining to Their level is within the 
reach of all who are willing to make the stupendous effort 
required. In normal times aspirants should need many 
births before they could gain Adeptship, but just now it is 
possible for them to hasten their progress on that Path, to 
compress into a few lives the evolution which otherwise 
would take many thousands of years. That is the effort 
which is being made by many members of the Theosophi- 
cal Society; for there is in that Society an Inner School 
which teaches men how to prepare themselves more 
rapidly for this higher work. That preparation needs 
great self-control, determined effort carried on year after 
year, and often with but little to show outwardly in the 
way of definite progress; for it involves the training of 
the higher bodies far more than the physical body, and the 
training of the higher does not always manifest itself very 
obviously on the physical plane. 

It is said that whenever a person joins the outer 
Theosophical Society the Master looks at him, and further- 
more that in many cases the Great Ones guide people to 
join the Society because of their previous lives. So it 
would seem that They usually know a great deal about us 
before we know anything about Them. The Adept never 
forgets anything. He appears to be always in full posses- 
sion of all that has happened to Him, and so if He does 
cast even a most casual glance at a person He will never 
thereafter overlook that person. When a person joins the 
Inner School a definite link is formed, not yet dérectly 
with an Adept, but first of all with the Outer Head of the 
School, and through the Outer Head with the Master 
Morya who is the Inner Head. 

All those in the Inner School are thus in touch with 
the Master Morya, though they are often working on 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM .429 


other lines than His, and will become pupils of other 
Masters when they are taken on Probation. Under such 
circumstances, however, they will receive the influence 
of their own future Master through these channels, because 
the Adepts, although living far apart physically, are in 
such very close contact that to be in touch with one of 
Them is really to be linked with all. 
This Path has many steps grouped into three great 
divisions : 
(1) The probationary period, or the Probationary 
Path, before any pledges are taken, or Initiations given 
to the pupil. 
(2) The period of pledged discipleship, or the Path 
Proper, at the end of which the pupil attains Adeptship. 
(3) The official period in which the Adept takes a 
definite part in the government of the world. The subject 
of this official period is far above ordinary comprehension. 
Q. But how can a householder, a man in the world 
surrounded with social duties, family obligations and 
worldly activities, lead the spiritual life and thereby 
prepare himself for the Path ? What are his initial stages 
of purification 7? | 
Ans. Ordinary men have first to be trained in Karma 
Yoga—action whereby union with the Divine may result. 
The three gunas or properties of matter, Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas, make the manifested universe, and the ordinary 
man, identifying himself with these activities, runs wild 
under their influence. Karma Yoga consists in the training 
of these gunas. The use of Tamas or darkness—sluggish- 
ness, negligence, indifference, laziness, inertia—in the growth 
of man is that it acts as a force to be struggled against 
and overcome, so that strength may be evolved, power of 
will developed and self-control acquired. So rites and 


430 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


ceremonies of religion are ordered to train man to over- 
come sloth and laziness, heedlessness and obstinacy of the 
lower nature. They are imposed as duties on him to train 
him to higher life and to compel the lower nature to walk 
along the right path determined by the will. 

Then Rajas or mobility, leading to hurry, bustle 
and constant effort to accomplish material results and 
gratify the lower nature, has to be directed, purified and 
transmuted by Karma Yoga into Sattva—rhythm or 
harmony—to serve the purpose of the Higher Self, and the 
life of the householder is the best preparation for the 
spiritual life. 

A householder must perforce live for others, and 
unselfishness is the chief harvest that he may reap in the 
rich field of home. Pity or compassion for weaker things 
is a virtue that he has full opportunity to cultivate there, 
while endurance and patience are the twins that take their 
birth most easily in the family-life. Again, liberality, 
hospitality, free and courteous, charity to the poor and to 
animals, the acquirement of the power of steady rule and 
of training younger souls, aloofness of spirit in which the 
spirit owns nothing even when the body is rolling in 
wealth, are some of the other virtues acquired in the 
householder’s life. Such are some of the lessons to be 
learnt in an earlier series of lives by the householder who 
has fixed his eyes on the goal and who seeks to use his life 
for the treading of the Probationary Path. In fact, such 
life is the best training-ground for the life of the disciple. 

Now an ordinary man acts for fruit to gratify his 
lower nature, for desire of reward, of money, under the 
sway of rajasic quality, but a man who aspires to a 
spiritual life must change his ideal from selfishness to 
service, change his motive in the work he may be doing, 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 431 


and begin to do that, not because it brings him livelihood 
—though there is nothing to be ashamed of in its bringing 
him the wherewithal to live here—not because he wants to 
gain something, but because it ought to be done. He may 
teach, heal, argue, trade or enter into commercial relations 
of all kinds, not for the mere money that it brings or the 
power that it yields, but in order that the great work of the 
world may be done and that by his service and help to 
humanity he may be a co-worker with the Divine in the 
world. Spirituality is the recognition of God everywhere 
and in everything, and whether a man is of the world 
worldly or of the spirit spiritual depends, not upon the 
environment, the outer circumstances, but upon the inner 
attitude. It is not a question of what one does, but how 
one does it. 

Thus Karma Yoga substitutes duty for self-grati- 
fication, but there is something greater even than duty, 
and that is when all action is done as sacrifice, when will- 
ing and spontaneous sacrifice takes the place of duty. In 
the outer daily life the man, formerly working for fruit in 
the world and for heaven after death, does everything 
first as duty and then as a free-will sacrifice, a joyful 
giving of everything. Without Divine sacrifice, Divine 
self-limitations, there would have been no universe, none 
of the worlds which fill the realms of space; and as the 
life of the world is based on sacrifice, all true life is also 
sacrificial. That which binds is not action, but the desire 
for the fruit of action; and the only action that does not 
bind is sacrifice ; and so carrying out every function of 
family and civic life as though he realised himself as an 
embodied God, with every action done as sacrifice, the 
householder, the man of the world, becomes the perfect 
or spiritual man. These are the first steps to the Path of 


432 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Discipleship for a man living in the world, leading him 
onwards towards the finding of the Guru, leading him to 
higher life till he has lost all attachment, is at heart the 
unattached, the wanderer, and by renunciation and self- 
sacrifice is filled with knowledge and devotion. 

Q. What, now, ts the first step or the most tmportant 
qualification necessary for approach to the Path ? What ts 
the mark whereby we can know whether a man ts prepar- 
ing to enter the Path ? 

Ans. The first step without which no approach to 
the Path is possible is the Service of Man. ‘ To live to 
benefit mankind is the first step,’’ says The Voice of the 
Stlence. The life of the man approaching the Path is 
marked by unselfish service of others, by his willingness to 
sacrifice all for the good of others, by his readiness to 
give up all, that worldly men account valuable, in devotion 
to an ideal or to a cause which he believes to embody the 
right. That is the mark of the man who is approaching 
the Path. Such a man, developing himself by means of 
service to others, realises the truth of the words which the 
Christ Himself uttered: “ Inasmuch as ye have done it 
unto the least of these My brethren ye have done it 
unto Me.” 

There is no distinction between various kinds of service, 
provided it is unselfish and strenuous. It may be purely 
intellectual, the work of the author or the writer trying to 
spread among others the knowledge he has found ; or it may 
be along the line of art, wherein the musician, the sculptor, 
the painter, puts before himself the ideal of making the 
world a little more beautiful, a little more full of grace ; or 
it may be along the line of social betterment where a man, 
moved by sympathy for the poor, pours out his life into 
the work of helping, or tries to change the old social 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 433 


environments or customs which retard the progress of 
mankind; or again the work may be along political lines 
with the life of a nation as the object of service, or it may 
be along the lines of healing. Any useful work may be 
chosen according to capacity ; commerce, industry, supply- 
ing men’s necessities, all come within service. 

Q. But every one is engaged tn one or other of these 
activities. Where, then, lies the difference ? 

Ans. The difference lies in the motive with which the 
work is undertaken. True, men are writers and authors, 
politicians, social reformers and doctors; they take part in 
industry and commerce; but moved by what motive ? 
Ordinary men are moved by motives of personal success, 
not of service, nor of lifting a little of the heavy karma of 
the world, of raising the world a little higher though at 
the same time earning their livelihood therein. Of course 
working for the fruit of action is necessary at a lower 
stage, but the ideal of service, helping the weak, teaching 
the ignorant, uplifting the oppressed, that unselfish service 
which gives everything and asks for nothing in return, not 
a choice, but an overpowering impulse, is the first step to 
the Path. 

Q. What, then, ts the second step or qualification for 
approach to the Path ? 

Ans. Being possessed by an idea, so that no argument, 
no personal advantage, can turn him away from it, marks 
the second step. The fixed idea may be that of a maniac, 
but that is a false idea. If the idea be a true one, turning 
to the service of man, such an idea-possessed man, like an 
enthusiast, a hero, a martyr, is near to the entrance of the 
Path. When a nian believes a thing to be true, it is 
easier for him to die a martyr like Giordano Bruno than to 


deny that truth. A man is judged more by his motive for 
55 


434 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


an action than by the action itself. The laurel-crown 
of heroism is not for the brows of only the successful and 
the strong ; he also is heroic who aspires, even though, 
aspiring, he fails. The efforts to realise a noble and lofty 
Ideal transforms the life into the Great and the 
Heroic. So making our action as wise as possible, we 
should give ourselves wholly to Service, keeping nothing 
back and helping wherever an opportunity for work 
is seen, and should devote ourselves entirely to some 
great ideal and follow it both in peace and in storm. 

Q. What, now, does tt mean to be a pupil of the 
Master ? What is expected of him who asptres to become 
one, and what ts the work he has to do ? 

Ans. The Masters have definitely dedicated Them- 
selves to the service of humanity. Their force, though very 
great, is still limited, and so They are very careful to use 
it to the best advantage. A Master may take a manasa 
pupil only when He sees that the amount of force used in 
training him will produce greater result in the end than 
any other method of expending the same amount. No 
person, however benevolent, kind and earnest he may be in 
his desire to help others, can be taken as a pupil if he is 
still full of minor imperfections, or has some weakness 
which may prove a serious obstacle in his way. If an 
individual is to receive special help, he must show special 
receptivity. A Master has no favourite. He has His 
private affections just as we have, and assuredly He loves 
some men more than others; but He will never allow such 
feelings as those to influence His attitude in the very 
slightest degree when the work is in question. He will 
take much trouble over a man if He sees in him the seeds 
of future greatness, if He thinks that he will prove a good 
investment for the amount of time and force spent upon 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 435 


him. There is no such possibility as the faintest thought 
of favouritism in His mind. He considers simply and 
solely the work which has to be done, the work of evolu- 
tion, and the value of the man in relation to it. Only 
unselfish service, or altruistic undertaking without thought 
of self, a loving, selfless, helpful nature, catches the atten- 
tion of a Master, and He turns towards that possible 
disciple, putting opportunities in his way to test his strength 
and to call forth his intuition. 

To become a pupil of a Master therefore means that 
the aspirant too must have the same outlook on life as the 
Master, must absolutely forget himself and have no per- 
sonal desire at all, must be willing to sacrifice everything, 
and himself first of all, must order his whole life according 
to the work he has to do, and must forsake all and follow 
Him. According to the Christ: ‘‘ He that loseth his life 
shall find it,” while the Lord Buddha says: “ Kill out the 
thirst for life, if you desire the Way.” 

The pupil is employed by the Master in many 
different ways. Some have to do the astral work of help- 
ing the living and the recently dead; others assist the 
Master personally in the work being done; some are sent 
astrally to deliver lectures to audiences of less advanced 
souls, or teach others who are free in the astral world 
temporarily in sleep or permanently after death. The 
newly dead have to be soothed and comforted, to be 
delivered, when possible, from the terrible though un- 
reasoning fear which but too often seizes them and retards 
their progress to higher spheres in addition to causing them 
unnecessary suffering, and to be explained, as far as 
possible, the condition in which they find themselves and 
the course of action which is most desirable for them. 
They have also to be enabled, to the extent of their 


436 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


‘Capacity, to comprehend the future that lies before them. 

Every astral helper has a number of regular cases. Most 
of the training to a new pupil in astral work is given by 
Some of the older pupils, though the Master Himself may 
sometimes give him some special instructions. 

Pupils are also employed by the Powers of Good as 
agents for the answering of prayers, and as channels for 
the pouring forth of Their energy. They are further- 
more trained to work by suggestion, 1.¢., simply to put 
good thoughts into the minds of those who are ready to 
receive them and suggest true and beautiful thoughts to 
authors, poets, artists and musicians. Without these 
influences humanity would be poor indeed, though for the 
most part it knows little of the source of its true wealth. 
The Adepts Themselves cannot turn aside from Their 
exalted work to do these lower and easier tasks, because if 
They did, the whole machinery of evolution would suffer. 

Thus the pupils do a great variety of work in every 
branch of civilisation and human culture, all of which is 
part of the Adepts’ work in the world; being also 
apprentices, as stated before, at their lower level they serve 
as channels of influence and transmitters of the force of 
the Masters to the world at large. 

Q. But with so much work requiring to be done, why 
does not the Master use the many asptrants who are so 
devoted ta Him and who earnestly desire to be taken as 
pupils and trained in order to help the world ? 

Ans. There may be many reasons why He does not. 
Sometimes a person will have some prominent fault which 
is in itself quite a sufficient reason. Not infrequently, it is 
pride. A person may have so great a conceit of himself, 
that he is not amenable to teaching, although he thinks 
that he is. Very often in this civilisation of ours the fault 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 437 


is irritability. We live to a large extent in a civilisation of 
torturing noises; and above all things noise jars the nerves 
and causes irritation. Some slight, unpleasant, temporary 
feeling, which passes out of mind in ten minutes, perhaps, 
may yet produce an effect on the astral body lasting for 
forty-eight hours. The vibrations do not settle down 
again for a considerable period of time. Thus a good and 
worthy person will have his nerves all ajangle, so that it 
would be impossible for him to be drawn into very close 
and constant touch with the Master. Sometimes the 
impediment is curiosity—curiosity about the affairs of 
other people, and especially about their occult standing 
or development. It would be quite impossible that a 
Master should draw near to Himself one who had that 
failing. 

Another common hindrance is readiness to be 
offended. Many a good and earnest aspirant is so easily 
offended as to be of practically no use in the work, because 
he cannot get on with other people. 

Again, many persons, instead of looking at the good 
points in the work or character of others, are ever ready 
to find fault and indulge in destructive criticism. But a 
Master says: ‘‘ There is a higher criticism which pounces 
upon a pearl as eagerly as your criticism flies at a flaw.” 

Many people have failings of this kind; but they 
do not like if their fault is pointed out to them, and do 
not generally believe that they have it. 

Self-centredness is only another form of pride, 
but it is verv prominent at the present day. The person- 
ality which we have been building up for many thousands 
of years has g,own strong, and often self-assertive, 
and it is one of the hardest tasks to reverse its attitude 
and compel it to acquire the habit of looking at things 


438 : THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


from the standpoint of others. One must certainly step 
out of the centre of his own circle, if he wishes to come 
to the Master. 

It sometimes happens, however, that the aspirants 
have not any particular outstanding defect, but they are 
not yet big enough, and must grow a little all-round before 
they will be worthy. It requires some strength and 
bigness to put oneself in the attitude towards the work 
which the Master Himself adopts, because, in addition 
to any defect of our own, we have the whole pressure 
of the thought of the world against us—the steady 
pressure of opinion from without—for millions of people 
all around us are thinking personal thoughts. 

The astral and mental bodies of an aspirant ought 
to be continually exhibiting four or five big and splendid 
emotions—love, devotion, sympathy and intellectual as- 
piration among them. But instead of a few great 
emotions vibrating splendidly and clearly with fine colour, 
the astral body is generally seen to be spotted over with 
red and brown and grey and black vortices, often a 
hundred or more. They are somewhat like a mass of 
warts would be on a physical body, preventing the skin 
from being sensitive as it should be. The candidate 
must see to it that these are removed, and that the usual 
tangle of petty emotions is entirely combed away. 

There can be no half measures on the Path. 
Many people are in the position of those much-maligned 
individuals, Ananias and Sapphira. They do not give 
everything, but keep back a little bit to themselves—not 
of their money, but of personal feeling deep down, which 
holds them back from the Master’s feet. In occultism 
that will not do. Aspirarts must follow the Master 
without reserve, not saying within: “I will follow the 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 439 


Master so long as He does not want me to work with 
such-and-such a person; I will follow the Master so long 
as all that I do is recognised!’’ They must not make 
conditions. This does not mean that they should give 
up their ordinary physical plane duties, but simply that 
their whole self should be at the Master’s disposal. They 
must be prepared to yield anything, to go anywhere 
—not as a test, but because the love of the work is the 
biggest thing in their lives. They must adopt an alto- 
gether different attitude towards life in general; that has 
been expressed by one of the Masters in the phrase: 
‘“ He that wishes to work with Us and for Us must leave 
his own world and come into Ours.” 

Q. What should we do to attract the attention of the 
Master ? 

Ans. If we work along the same lines as He works we 
shall come more and more into sympathy with Him, 
and our thoughts will become more and more like His. 
This will bring us nearer and nearer to Him both in 
thought and activity, and in so doing presently we shall 
attract His attention, for He is all the time watching 
the world in order to find those who will be of use in 
His work. Noticing us, He will presently draw us 
nearer to Him for still closer and more detailed obser- 
vation. That is usually done by bringing us into contact 
with one who is already His pupil. It is thus quite 
unnecessary for anyone to make any direct effort to 
attract His attention. 

Q. But among the myriads of men in the whole of 
humanity how can a Master know whether any person ts 
fit for the Path ? 

Ans. On the background of human selfishness, in the 
night of human struggle, a heart on fire with the love and 


449 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


service of humanity glows like a lamp in the dark, like the 
flame of a light-house in the darkness of the night, and the 
Master knows at once that a future disciple is there. 

As a man standing on a mountain-top sees a light in 
a single cottage because the light shines out against the 
surrounding darkness, so a man having lighted his soul, 
catches the eye of the Watcher on the mountain. Buta 
rigid self-discipline is necessary before a man can become 
even a candidate for discipleship. 

Q. In what way ts a man led to seek the Master ? 

Ans, Truly has it been declared in an eastern Scripture, 
the Bhagavad-Gita of the Hindus: “ By whatever road a 
man approaches Me, even on that road do I welcome him, 
for all roads are Mine.” And again: “ The ways to God 
are as many as the breaths of the children of men” is the 
exquisite saying of the Sufis, the mystics of Islam. But 
all these various methods may be classed into three groups: 
Jiiina Yoga, Union by Knowledge ; Bhakti Yoga, Union 
by Devotion; Karma Yoga, Union by Action; all the 
three blending into one at a later stage when each acquires 
the qualifications of the other two. In the first, one is 
moved by an intense desire for knowledge, by the longing 
to understand ; in the second a man approaches the seeking 
by intense love for some person or loyalty and devotion to 
a leader embodying an ideal; while in the third great type 
one has the will-aspect aroused in him by the realisation 
of the terrible suffering of so many around him. When 
people have reached a point when they feel they must 
know or perish, when they feel they must have a perfect 
ideal or lose all heart to live, or when they feel they must 
find a remedy for human pain, then something comes in 
their way to stimulate a conscious search for a Master—a 
comparatively insignificant thing or incident, a book, a 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 441 


lecture, a picture—and then knowledge comes to them 
of the great facts of Reincarnation, of Karma, of the 
existence of the Path, of the existence of Those who have 
trodden the Path; and with that comes a longing not only 
to understand, but to be an instrument for the working out 
of the divine Plan in the scheme of evolution. Sucha 
person discovers that there is a science called the Science of 
Yoga or the Science of Union, and he sees stretching 
before him the beginning of the Path, and learns the 
qualifications necessary for its treading. 

Yoga is the application of the laws of evolution of 
the human mind to the individual, so that a man can 
thereby quicken the evolution of his mind and outstrip his 
race in order to help the world; it is the way by which 
a man may hasten his evolution, expand his consciousness 
and rise into union with the Divine. But Yoga requires a 
Discipline of Life. The ordinary laws of Nature carry us 
along ordinary evolution, but if we increase the stress for a 
swifter evolution, we must strengthen those parts of 
ourselves which are subjected to that strain. A man 
wanting to do in a brief space of time what the vast 
majority of his race will take hundreds of thousands of 
years in accomplishing must prepare his unprepared body 
and his untrained mind by the Discipline of Life and 
acquire, at least to some extent, the Qualifications for 
Discipleship before he can enter even the Probationary 
Path. 

Q. Of the two requirements, the Disctpline of Life and 
the Qualifications for Discipleship, what ts meant by the 
first ? 

Ans. The Discipline of Life is a rigid self-discipline for 
purification—purification of all the temporary vehicles, of 


the physical body and the lower nature, of the emotions 
&6 


442 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


and the mind. Alcoholic drinks of all kinds should be 
given up, because the practice which leads to the seeking 
of a Master necessitates meditation, concentrated and 
definite, intended to stimulate and develop certain physical 
Organs in the brain, and alcoholic vapours and narcotic 
drugs have a poisonous effect upon those organs. — 

Again, flesh-food of all kinds is to be dropped, for 
it coarsens the body as explained in Chapter I. Apart 
from the question of compassion, a student of Yoga 
requires a body, strong and resistant, as well as sensitive 
and responsive to the vibrations from the subtle worlds of 
matter and of life. 

The aspirant should then purify the astral body and 
acquire self-control, training the lower nature until it is 
absolutely subject to the will. He should cleanse the 
desire-nature from every touch of the personal self and 
purge it of everything which makes it separate from those 
that are below as well as from Those that are above, thus 
breaking down the walls of separateness. But while 
striking away everything that is personal, he must retain 
the essence of all the numerous qualities which he has 
acquired as the result of his incessant climbing of the 
Ladder of Life. 

For the better understanding of the purification of 
the lower nature some illustrations may be found useful. 
Let us first take that mighty force which is developed in 
the lower stages of the growth of every human being, but 
which is now required to be purified—the force of anger 
or wrath. We see it in the undeveloped man in the brutal 
form of passion, beating down all opposition to the gratifi- 
cation of his will. In order to train that passion of anger the 
man first gets rid of the personal element by forgiveness 
of injury as one of his duties, giving love for hatred, 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 443 


overcoming evil with good. There still remains an imper- 
sonal anger. He sees a poor man oppressed or an animal 
ill-treated, and he gets angry with the oppressor. That 
impersonal anger, noble indignation, nobler than stolid 
indifference, has to be transmuted into the quality of doing 
justice both to the weak and to the strong, compassionating 
the wrong-doer as well as the wronged, as the wrong-doer 
through ignorance injures himself more than the person 
wronged, by his storing up of evil karma for the future, 
and therefore requires help and training. The man stops 
the wrong-doing because it is his duty to do so, but 
recognising the Divine even in the heart of the wrong-doer, 
is gentle to him, transmuting the anger by spiritual 
alchemy into perfect justice which stops all wrong, and 
helps the tyrant as well as the slave, the oppressor as well 
as the oppressed. 

So again with love, sensual love that showed itself 
in forms, foul and vile, becoming nobler and less selfish, 
moralised, refined and purified, being transmuted by 
spiritual alchemy into a love that in going out to others 
seeks to serve them rather than to serve itself, seeks how 
much it may give rather than how much it may take, and 
thus gradually becomes divine in its essence. 

Similarly, covetousness, selfishness and other pas- 
sions of the lower nature must be burnt up and purified 
all through, in the Discipline of Life. Yoga is thus 
accomplished by temperate self-control, by the deliberate 
training of the lower nature, by quietly choosing pure 
materials for food and by care and moderation in all 
physical activities. 

Q. Now as to che second requirement; what are the 
qualtficaitons demanded ere entrance to the Probationary 
Path be gained ? 


444 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Ans. The first of the qualifications, necessary to a con- 
siderable extent before discipleship is possible, is control of 
thought. When we say that a man is self-controlled, what 
we ordinarily mean is that his intellectual or higher nature 
with its mind and will, with its reasoning power and judg- 
ment, is stronger than his lower nature with its passions 
and emotions. That self-contro] in the ordinary sense of 
the word is an admirable quality truly, but very much 
more than that, more than control of the lower nature by 
the higher, is wanted by a candidate for discipleship. We 
have already studied the creative power and influence of 
thought in Chapter VII, and thus know that a deliberate 
control of thought is necessary in the systematic training of 
the mind—thinking deliberately and with a purpose behind 
the thought, refusing to harbour the cast-off fragments of 
the thoughts of others and concentrating thought on one 
idea by constant practice in daily life. 

This control of thought is a necessary condition for 
discipleship, because when a man becomes a disciple, his 
thoughts gain added power and increased vitality and 
energy. By a thought a man can kill another or heal a 
disease ; by a thought he can influence a crowd or create 
a visible illusion ; and so before these mighty powers come 
within his reach, he should learn to control his thoughts, 
check all evil in them and harbour nothing save what is 
pure, beneficent and useful. 

Another important qualification is meditation, the 
deliberate and formal training of the mind in concentration 
and in fixity of thought. Daily practice of meditation, 
devotional as well as intellectual, is necessary. The candi- 
date in the hour of his morning-meditation should learn to 
concentrate his. mind on the Divine Ideal, the Teacher 
whom he ultimately hopes to find; while for intellectua 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 445 


meditation which is concerned with the gradual and con- 
scious building of character, he should choose some good 
quality as the subject of his meditation and should build it 
in his life by the conjoint process of meditation and action. 
He should meditate on purity, truth, compassion, fearless- 
ness, forgiveness, chastity, etc., one after another, and 
should build a noble character by working out those virtues 
in the speech and actions of daily life. 

Every one who meditates upon the Master makes a 
definite connection with Him, which shows itself to clair- 
voyant vision as a kind of line of light. The Master 
always subconsciously :eels the impinging of such a line 
and sends out in response a steady stream of magnetism 
which continues to play long after the meditation is over. 
The regular practice of such meditation and concentration 
is thus of the utmost help to the aspirant, and regularity 
is one of the most important factors in producing the 
result. It should be undertaken daily at the same hour, 
and he should steadily persevere with it, even though no 
obvious effect may be produced. When no result appears 
he must be especially careful to avoid depression, because 
that makes it more difficult for a Master’s influence to act 
upon him, and it also shows that he is thinking of himself 
more than of the Master. 

Thus control of thought, daily meditation and noble 
character are the three main qualifications for Probation 
or probationary discipleship, but one quality underlies 
them all, and that is earnestness, the earnestness which has 
recognised its object and definitely seeks its goal. 

Q. What ts the object of the stage called Probation ? 
How and why is a man taken first as a probationary pupil ? 
Ans. When an aspirant has by the practice of Yoga 
purified all his vehicles, and has, by unselfish labour for 


446 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


human good, by devotion, piety, purity and self-sacrifice, 
by control of thought, meditation and nobility of character, 
struggled onwards to the front crest of the advancing 
human wave, showing a selfless nature all through in 
the service of man, then he finds his Master, or rather 
his Master finds him. But before He definitely accepts 
him as a pupil, He takes special precautions to assure 
Himself that the man is fit enough to be drawn into 
intimate contact with Himself; and that is the object of 
the stage called Probation. The Master subjects the 
aspirant to the test of time, for many people, swept 
upwards by enthusiasm, appear at first to be most promis- 
ing and eager to serve, but unfortunately become tired 
after a while, and slip back. Throughout the struggle 
those gracious eyes have been watching his progress, and 
at a certain stage in that progress when he receives, 
through a senior pupil, the Master’s summons to enter into 
His physical presence which he usually does in his astral 
body, the Master reveals Himself to him and places him 
definitely on Probation. There is not generally much 
ceremony connected with this step; the Master gives a few 
words of advice, tells the new pupil what will be expected 
of him, and often, in His gracious way, He may find some 
reason to congratulate him on the work that he has already 
accomplished. 

A pupil is put on Probation in response to a demand, 
made by him to the Guardians of Humanity, to be given 
opportunities for a swifter progress than is normal with 
ordinary humanity. His individual karma has at the 
same time to be readjusted, freeing him from such types of 
karma as may limit his further usefulness and giving him 
greater opportunities for wider knowledge and more 
effective service. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 447 


When a Master takes an aspirant as a probationary 
pupil, it is with the expectation of presenting him for 
Initiation in that life. But simply because a Master has 
responded to his aspiration, it does not follow that the 
pupil will succeed; the opportunity is given to him 
because he has earned it as a karmic right, but what he 
makes of that opportunity depends solely on himself. Still 
he is very likely to succeed if he “ means business ” and 
works strenuously in the service of the world. 

Q. What are the ordinary faults in everyday life which 
act as hindrances to the progress of the probationary 
pupil 7 

Ans. Irritability is a common fault ; the torturing noises 
of our present civilisation and the pressure of so many 
astral bodies vibrating at different rates make it very 
difficult to avoid irritability—especially for the pupil, 
whose bodies are more highly strung and sensitive than 
those of the ordinary man. Of course, this irritation is 
somewhat superficial; yet some slight temporary feeling 
may produce an effect lasting for forty-eight hours. When 
such a fault as this is known, it can most effectually be 
removed not by focussing attention upon it, but by en- 
deavouring to develop the opposite virtue, as explained 
before. One way of dealing with it is to set one’s thought 
steadfastly against it, but there is no doubt that this course 
of action arouses opposition in the mental or astral ele- 
mental, so that often a better method is to try to develop 
consideration for others, based of course fundamentally on 
one’s love towards them. A man who is full of love and 
consideration will not allow himself to speak or even to 
think irritably towards them. If the man can be filled 
with that idea the same result will be attained without 
exciting opposition from the elementals. 


448 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


There are many other forms of selfishness that can 
delay the pupil’s progress very seriously. Laziness is one 
form of these. A person enjoying himself very much with 
a book will not like to leave it in order to be punctual ; 
another will write very badly, careless of the inconvenience 
and the damage to the eyes and the temper of those who 
have to read his caligraphy. All such things tend to make 
one less sensitive to high influences, to make life untidy and 
ugly for other persons, and to destroy self-control and 
efficiency. Efficiency and punctuality are essential, if satis- 
factory work is to be done. Many people are inefficient ; 
when a piece of work is given to them, they do not 
finish it thoroughly, but make all kinds of excuses ; or when 
they are asked for some information, they do not know 
how to find it. People differ much in this respect. One 
person may be asked a question, and he will answer: “I 
don’t know’; but another will say: “‘ Well, I don’t know, 
but I will go and find out,” and he returns with the 
required information. 

Yet in all good work the pupil must always think 
of the benefit that will result to others and of the oppor- 
tunity to serve the Master in these matters—which even 
when they are materially small are great in spiritual 
value—and not of the good karma resulting to himself, 
which would be only another and very subtle form of 
self-centredness. 

Other subtle effects of the same kind are to be seen 
in depression and jealousy, and aggressive assertion of 
one’s rights. An Adept has said: “ Think less about 
your rights and more about your duties.” There are 
some occasions in dealing with the outside world when 
the pupil might find it necessary gently to state what he 
needs, but amongst his fellow-pupils there are no such 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 449 


things as rights, but only opportunities. If a man feels 
annoyed, he begins to shoot out from himself aggressive 
feelings ; he may not go so far as actual hatred, but he 
is setting up a dull glow in his astral body and affecting 
his mental body as well. 

Similar disturbances are frequently set up in the 
mental body, and are equally disastrous in their effects. 
If a man allows himself to be greatly worried over some 
problem, and turns it over and over again in his mind 
without reaching any conclusion, he has thereby set up 
something like a storm in his mental body. There are 
some argumentative people who must argue about every- 
thing, and apparently love the exercise so much that they 
scarcely care on which side of the problem they are 
engaged. A person of that sort has his mental body 
in a condition of perpetual inflammation, and the in- 
flammation is liable on very slight provocation to break 
out at any moment into an actual open sore. For such 
a one there is no hope of any kind of occult progress, 
until he has brought balance and common-sense to bear 
on this diseased condition. 

Those approaching the Masters must be utterly free 
from all that is boisterous and rough. Again, there is 
sometimes a tendency towards inane giggling which has a 
very bad effect on the astral body. It weaves round it a 
web of grey-brown threads, very unpleasant to look upon, 
which forms a layer which hinders the entrance of good 
influences. Joyousness should not be allowed, on the 
one hand, to be tinged by any sort of roughness or 
rudeness, nor, on the other, to degenerate into silly giggling. 

Especially is it necessary for the aspirant to avoid 
all fidgetiness or fussiness; for by yielding to these 
failings, he sets up around him such an aura of tremulous 

57 


‘#50 wt _ “‘THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


vibrations that no thought or feeling can pass in or out 
‘without distortion. 

'- A clairvoyant who can see the effect upon the 
higher bodies of the various undesirable emotions finds 
no difficulty in understanding how important it is that 
they should be controlled. But because most persons 
cannot see the result they are liable to forget it, and allow 
themselves to become careless. If the pupil who has 
been put on Probation could see, while awake in his 
physical body, the living images that the Master makes, he 
would understand much more fully the importance of 
what may seem to be but minor details. If he can 
cultivate the habit of taking the right point of view, of 
acting for the right reasons, and of being in the right 
attitude, all along, and can work strenuously and un- 
selfishly under the guidance of a senior pupil of the 
Master, he will considerably quicken his progress and 
will steadily draw nearer and nearer to the ideal of 
the Masters. 

Y. How does the sentor pupil guide the younger pupil in 
his progress ? 

Ans. Very much help by example as well as by way of 
definite instructions on all sorts of matters including the 
formation of character is often given to the aspirant, both 
probationary and accepted, by the presence of an older 
pupil of the Master. As stated before, when a guru 
selected his chelas in the early days in India, he formed 
them into a group and took them about with him wherever 
he went; and though often they received no instruction, 
yet they made rapid progress, because all the time they 
were within the aura of the teacher and were being 
brought into harmony with it, instead of being surrounded 
by ordinary influences. The Masters cannot adopt that 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 45x: 


plan physically, but They have sometimes arranged 
matters so that some of Their elder pupils can draw round 
themselves a group of the younger ones, and attend to 
them individually, much as a gardener would deal with his 
plants, raying upon them day and night the influences 
needed to awaken certain qualities or strengthen weak 
points. The older pupil rarely receives direct instructions 
with regard to this work ; though now and then the Master 
may make some remark or comment. 

The fact that the pupils are together in a group also 
assists their progress; they are influenced in common by 
high ideals, and this hastens the growth of desirable 
characteristics. It is probably inevitable in the course 
of karmic law that one who is aspiring shall be brought 
into contact with someone more advanced than himself, 
and receive much benefit through his ability to respond to 
him; and generally the Master does not advance or raise 
any person unless he has been with an older pupil who can 
guide and help him, though there are exceptions, and each 
Master has His own way of dealing with His pupils. Thus 
the aspirant is trained and makes rapid progress under the 
guidance of some senior pupil of His Master. 

Q. Now what is the work to be accomplished by one 
who enters on the Probationary Path? What ts the life 
of the disciple in its early stages ? 

Ans. The work is entirely moral and mental, and the 
probationer has to bring himself up to the point when he 
will “meet his Master face to face”. He now finds that 
there are certain qualifications laid down for the treading 
of the Probationary Path, the Path of Purification of the 
Christian Church, and that he has to acquire them not 
by a vague wish, but by daily meditation and practice 
in life. 


452° | HEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


: There are four qualifications required of a proba- 
tionary pupil before he can become an accepted disciple, 
though in this stage nothing like perfect performance is 
demanded from him. Those qualifications are given in 
detail in that admirable little book, At the Feet of the 
Master, which has been translated into twenty-seven 
languages and of which there have been some forty editions 
or more with over a hundred thousand copies printed; we 
can simply give an outline here with their technical names 
in Sanskrit (used by Hindus) and Pali (used by Buddhists). 

I. Viveka—discrimination between the real and 
the unreal, between the eternal and the transitory ; also 
between the right and the wrong, the important and the 
unimportant, the useful and the useless, the true and the 
false, the selfish and the unselfish. The pupil should 
develop a discrimination between fleeting things like fame, 
power and social position, and lasting things like mental, 
moral and spiritual qualities. He must learn to discern 
the God within from the passions and follies without, and 
seeing the Divine, the best, in every man and in everything 
—no matter how evil he or it may appear on the surface— 
must learn to identify himself with that best in order to 
help. This quality is called Manoduiravajjana or the 
opening of the doors of the mind, among the Buddhists. 

II. Vatragya—desirelessness or dispassion. The 
ordinary desires, fleeting fancies, likings and dislikings, 
making up so much of a man’s life, have not to be killed 
out, but to be transcended and transmuted into the higher, 
to be changed into the one desire to be in perfect accord 
with the Divine Will. For example, weak, selfish human 
love can have its animal side transcended with that love 
turned into selfless love for all humanity. As the disciple 
sees the unreality of things around him, worldly objects 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY To THEM 453. 


Jose their attractive power, and out of indifference to the 
objects grows indifference for their fruits which also are 
recognised as unreal and impermanent. He is not to 
cease from activity; yet he is not to be ambitious, though 
working like those who are. One test of desirelessness 
is that he should be able to see without a pang of regret 
his whole project of years crumbling into dust. All 
disappointment or regret comes from thought of self and 
implies desire for the fruit of action. Moreover, so long 
as an ungratified desire can cause him unhappiness, he is 
still identifying himself with his desires. He should 
‘‘never wish to shine or to appear clever, have no desire 
to speak’ and ‘be accustomed to listen rather than to 
talk,” sternly repressing “ the wish to meddle in other 
men’s business”. Thus when Viveka is really felt, not 
merely said, all desire for worldly objects ceases, and 
Vairagya follows in the wake of Viveka as the wheel 
follows the horse. Among the Buddhists it is known as 
Parikamma, preparation for action; indifference to the 
fruit of action, acquired by doing right without consider- 
Ing one’s own gain or loss. 

III. Shatsampatti—the sixfold group of mental 
qualities or attributes, Mental Endowments, sometimes 
called Good Conduct, qualities most necessary for the 
pupil; called Upachiro, attention to conduct, among the 
Buddhists. Those qualities are given as 

1, Shama—control of thought. It is more 
often the mind that controls the man than the man that 
controls the mind. There should be the control of temper 
with the mind calm and courageous, without worry or 
depression, and this s2lf-control as to the mind is absolute- 
ly necessary, for unless the mind moves only in obedience 
to the guidance of the will, it cannot be a perfect 


454 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


instrument for the Master’s work in the future. This 
qualification is a very comprehensive one, and includes with- 
in itself both the self-control and the calmness necessary 
for astral work. 

2. Dama—control of conduct, self-control in 
action, control in act and speech. Much mischief is caused 
by thoughtless or unkind speech or careless repetition, but 
if the thought be right, conduct will follow suit. ‘“ Before 
the voice can speak in the presence of the Masters, it 
must have lost the power to wound.”’ The pupil should do 
all his ordinary duties, be constantly active in good work 
and “ be always ready to offer help where it is needed, but 
never interfere ”’. 

3. Uparati—tolerance; a kind and noble toler- 
ance of all around him, able to understand all and 
demanding from none more than he can give. It is the 
recognition of the right of another to think for himself 
without the slightest interference from others. With this 
tolerant attitude he should look on all from within and see 
their aspirations, desires and motives, and though knowing 
that no ceremonies are necessary, should yet refrain from 
condemning those who cling to them. Freed from all 
bigotry and superstition, he should learn to be tolerant of 
all forms of religion, all varieties of custom, all beliefs and 
traditions of men, knowing them as so many outward 
appearances of the same fundmental Truth. 

4. Tsttksha—endurance. This virtue is also 
translated as cheerfulness, as it implies the readiness to 
bear, with cheerfulness and gladness, whatever one’s karma 
may bring, and to part with anything and everything 
worldly whenever it may be necessary. The pupil under- 
stands that “ Nothing matters much and most things 
matter not at all,” and unperturbed by joy or sorrow 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 455 


knows that‘ This too shall pass away ” and that “ What- 
ever is, is best’. Realising that whatever comes to him in 
the form of troubles of mind or body, of family or business, 
is of his own creation in the past, and that those who do 
him wrong are but the instruments of his own karma, he 
bears all, not only with a total absence of resentment, but 
with absolute cheerfulness. He also knows that he is of 
little use to the Master till his evil karma is fully worked 
out, and so he cheerfully welcomes any quickening of his 
karma, working out now in one or two lives what otherwise 
might extend over a hundred, thus paying in enormous 
difficulties and troubles for what he gains in time. 

5. Shraddha—tfaith, confidence. It is the deep 
inner conviction of his own divinity and therefore of his 
power to achieve ; the strong faith in his own divinity, not 
yet realised but felt ; the perfect confidence in his Master 
and in himself. Knowing that “ Unless there is perfect trust, 
there cannot be the perfect flow of love and power,” he 
trusts to the uttermost his Master who has taught and 
guided him and who will lead him through the thorny path 
to the gate of Initiation; and through confidence in his 
divine self he believes that ‘* What man (now his Master) 
has done, man (he himself) can do ”’. 

6. Samiadhana—balance, composure, peace of 
mind, equilibrium unshaken by sorrow or joy. It is one- 
pointedness in the Master’s work which the pupil has set 
before him to do; one-pointedness in following the Path 
from which no temptations, worldly pleasure or affections 
can turn him aside even for a moment. 

IV. Mumukshutva—desire for liberation 
(from the wheel of births and deaths) as the Hindu calls 
it ; Anuloma—direct order or succession—as the Buddhist 
names it, its attainment following on the other three 


$56 THEOSOPHY. EXPLAINED 


qualifications. It is really the will to be one with the 
‘Supreme ; and because the Supreme is Love, and because a 
person who would become one with Him must be filled with 
perfect unselfishness and love, love raised from the human 
to the divine, a Master names this fourth qualification as 
Love, and brands the three vices of gossip, cruelty and 
superstition as sins against love. The pupil must not only 
refrain from evil, but must be active in doing good and 
must ever be on the watch to render service to all men, 
animals and plants around him. He must yearn to be 
one with God, not for his own sake, but in order that he 
may be a channel through which His love and life may 
flow to others. 

The perfect attainment of these accomplishments 
and qualifications is not expected at this early stage, 
but when the pupil has acquired them so as to mark his 
character, he is called the Adhikari by the Hindu and the 
Gotrabhi (one in the condition of fitness for Initiation) by 
the Buddhist. “ Only those actions through which shines 
the light of the Cross are worthy of the life of the disciple,’ 
says one of the verses in a book of occult maxims; and 
this means that all that the aspirant does should be 
prompted by a fervour of self-sacrificing love. He has 
trodden the Probationary Path which leads up to the 
“ Strait Gate ”’ of Initiation, beyond which is the “ ancient 
narrow way, the path “difficult to tread as the sharp 
edge of the razor,” the “ Path of Holiness ”’. 

Q. Does the Master give to the probationary pupil any 
spectal work to be done or any advice and instruction ? 

Ans. In the case of elder people put upon Probation, 
they are left to a large extent to find the most suitable 
work for themselves; but with the younger people He 
sometimes quite definitely puts a piece of work in the 


‘THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM . 457. 


way of one of them and watches to see how he does it. 
He condescends sometimes to give special messages of 
encouragement and instruction to individuals among these 
young people, and even to give special advice as to their 
training. For the guidance of other young people who 
desire to follow along the same path extracts from some 
of those messages are given here: 


“TI know that your one object in life is to serve 
the Brotherhood ; yet do not forget that there are higher 
steps before you, and that progress on the Path means 
sleepless vigilance. You must not only be always ready 
to serve; you must be ever watching for opportunities 
—nay, making opportunities—to be helpful in small 
things, in order that when the greater work comes you 
may not fail to see it. 


“ Never for a moment forget your occult relation 
ship; it should be an ever-present inspiration to you—not 
only a shield from the fatuous thoughts which float around 
us, but a constant stimulus to spiritual activity. The 
vacuity and pettiness of ordinary life should be impossible 
for us, though not beyond our comprehension and 
compassion. 


“Fach must realise that there are other points 
of view than his own and that they may be just as worthy 
of attention. All coarseness or roughness of speech, all 
tendency to argumentativeness, must absolutely dis- 
appear; one who is prone to it should check himself when 
the impulse towards it arises; he should say little, and 
that always with delicacy and courtesy. Never speak 
without first thinking whether what you are going to say 
is both kind and sensible. 


“ Thoughts and feelings of an undesirable kind 
must be rigorously excluded; you must work at them 
until they are impossible to you. Touches of irritability 
ruffle the calm sea of the consciousness of the Brother- 
hood. Pride must be eliminated, for it is a serious bar 
to progress. Exquisite delicacy of thought and speech is 
needed—the rare aroma of perfect tact which can never 

58 


458 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


jar or offend. That is hard to win, yet you may reach 
it 1f you will. 

‘¢ Definite service, and not mere amusement, should 
be your aim; think, not what you want to do, but what 
you can do that will help someone else; forget about 
yourself, and consider others. A pupil must be consistently 
kind, obliging, helpful—not now and then, but all the time. 
Remember, all time which is not spent in service (or fitting 
yourself for service) is for us José time. 


‘When you see certain evils in yourself, take them 
in hand manfully and effectively. Persevere, and you will 
succeed. It is a question of will-power. Watch for 
opportunities and hints; be efficient. I am always ready 
to help you, but I cannot do the work for you; the effort 
must come from your side. Try to deepen yourself all 
round and to live a Jife of utter devotion to service. 


“You have done well, but 1 want you to do better 
yet. I have tested you by giving you opportunities to 
help, and so far you have taken them nobly. I shall there- 
fore give you more and greater opportunities, and your 
progress will depend upon your recognising them and 
availing yourself of them. Remember that the reward of 
successful work is always the opening out before you of 
more work and that faithfulness in what seem to you 
small things leads to employment in matters of greater 
importance. I hope that you will soon draw closer to Me, 
and in so doing will help your brothers along the Path 
which leads to the feet of the King. Be thankful that you 
have a great power of love, that you know how to flood 
your world with sunlight, to pour yoursclf out with royal 
prodigality, to scatter largess like a king; that indced 1s 
well, but take care lest in the heart of this great flower of 
love there should be a tiny touch of pride, which might 
spread as does an almost invisible spot of decay, until it 
has tainted and corrupted the whole blossom. Remember 
what our great Brother has written: ‘ Bc humble if thou 
wouldst attain to wisdom; be humbler still when wisdom 
thou hast mastered.’ Cultivate that modest fragrant 
plant, humility, until its sweet aroma permeates every fibre 


of your being. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 459 


*] welcome you, the latest recruit to our glorious 
band. It is not easy for you to forget yourself entirely, to 
yield yourself without reservation to the service of the 
world; yet that is what is required of us—that we should 
live only to be a blessing to others, and to do the work 
which is given us to do. You have made a good beginning 
in the process of self-development, but much yet remains 
to be done. Repress even the slightest shade of irritability, 
and be ready always to receive advice and instruction ; 
cultivate humility and self-sacrifice, and fill yourself with 
a fervid enthusiasm for service. So shall you be a fitting 
instrument in the hand of the Great Master, a soldier in 
the army of Those who save the world. To help you in 
that I now take you as a probationary pupil.”’ 


QO. What, now, becomes of the pupil after he has 
acquired the four qualifications in the probationary 
stage? What is the pertod for that stage and what is his 
relation to his Master during that and the other following 
stages ? 

Ans. When a man has acquired the qualifications 
necessary for entrance upon the stage of the probationary 
pupil, the Master calls him astrally into His presence as 
Stated before, takes him upon Probation, and keeps him 
under close observation for an average period of seven 
years, though that period is known to have been lengthened 
to thirty years in the case of an unsatisfactory candidate 
and reduced to only a few weeks in one quite exceptional 
case. During that period of Probation the pupil, though 
receiving during sleep much teaching from his Master, 
using his astral body as a vehicle of consciousness for 
the astral work of help, and learning also much of the life 
of the mental plane during meditation, does not come in 
direct communication with his Master and hears or sees 
nothing of Him. 

The Probation or proving of the pupil consists in 
testing him to see how far he can withstand the shocks of 


460 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


his karma which has to be hastened, and yet remain firm 
in his altruism, in spite of the fact that his life becomes 
more barren of those satisfactions and delights which make 
life worth living for most men. He is also tested to see if 
he understands that “A small thing which is directly 
useful in the Master’s work is far better worth doing than 
a large thing which the world would call good,” and 
adapts himself sufficiently to be an eager worker and 
servant of the Master in His numerous activities for the 
evolution of humanity. The pupil is thus put on Proba- 
tion less to gain knowledge from the Master and more to 
train himself as an apprentice to help the Master in His 
work. He is consequently expected to harmonise his 
methods of work to those of his Master, to be ready to 
co-operate with his fellow-apprentices and in all ways to 
prove that an Ideal of work weighs more with him than 
his personal satisfaction as a worker. But then during 
this period, though full of tests and trials of all sorts on all 
planes, relieved at times by encouraging experiences and 
hints and help, no special difficulties are, as a rule, put in 
his way, and he is simply watched carefully by the Master 
in his attitude towards the little daily troubles of life. 
For convenience of observation the Master makes what is 
called a ‘living image’ of the pupil—that is to say, He 
moulds out of mental, astral and etheric matter an exact 
counterpart of the causal, mental, astral and etheric 
bodies of the neophyte, and keeps that image at hand, so 
that He may look at it periodically. Each image 1s 
magnetically attached to the person whom it represents, 
so that every variation of thought and feeling in him is 
accurately reproduced in it by sympathetic vibration, and 
thus by a single glance at the image the Master can see at 
once whether during the period since He last looked at it 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 401 


there has been any sort of disturbance in the bodies which 
it represents—whether the man has been losing his temper, 
or allowing himself to be a prey to impure feelings, worry, 
depression, or anything of the kind. 

If that prospective pupil’s progress in the acquisi- 
tion of the four qualifications, outlined before, as well as : 
the perfectly accurate record of his thoughts and feelings, 
read through the living image, is found satisfactory, 
another summons comes from the Master who then dis- 
solves the living image and takes the pupil into the far 
closer relationship of the second stage—the stage of the 
accepted pupil—and gives him illuminating teaching to 
help him more swiftly on his way. He now becomes a 
channel for the forces of the Master and an intelligent 
co-operator with Him, an outpost of his Master’s con- 
sciousness. In order to have his vehicles harmonised and 
attuned by close association with the Master, he is taken 
into his Master’s consciousness so intimately, that whatever 
he sees or hears is within the knowledge of the Master ; 
and if unfortunately some thought, unfit to be harboured 
by the Master, comes into the consciousness of the pupil, 
the Master has at once to erect a barrier to shut off that 
vibration from Himself. But as that directs the attention 
of the Master and takes a certain amount of His energy, 
the pupil has to guard himself very carefully against 
thoughts, not only definitely evil or selfish, but even trifling 
or critical. Being in this way in close touch with his 
Master’s thoughts, he can at any time see what that 
thought is upon any given subject, test his judgment by 
the judgment of the Master on the subject by raising his 
consciousness for tLe moment to touch the fringe of his 
Master’s consciousness, and thus save himself from error ; 
while the Master can at any moment send a thought 


462 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


through the pupil in the form of either a suggestion or a 
message, though in the earlier stages the pupil supposes 
those ideas to have arisen spontaneously in his own mind. 

Then there is the third stage of even more intimate 
union when the pupil becomes what is called the ‘Son’ 
of the Master, and the link is such that not only the lower 
mind but also the ego in the causal body of the pupil is 
enfolded within that of the Adept. That is brought about 
only after the Master has, through considerable experience 
of the man as an accepted disciple, satisfied Himself that 
nothing unworthy, requiring to be shut off, will ever arise 
in the mind or astral body of the pupil; for though the 
accepted pupil can be switched off when desired, the 
‘Son,’ drawn into a close and sacred union, cannot be so 
shut off or have his consciousness separated from that of 
the Master even for a moment. He who is a Son of the 
Master either already is or will soon become a member of 
the Great White Brotherhood also. Being a ray of his 
Master’s consciousness, the pupil now comes to possess a 
depth of wisdom which is not his own, but is given to him 
for use by his Master. Nevermore can the pupil be alone ; 
in griefs and in joys, in darkness and in light, the Master’s 
consciousness enfolds that of the pupil, even though at 
times the latter may not be aware of that glorious fact. 

At each stage, from Probation to Acceptance and 
thence to Initiation, the Master formally presents His 
pupil to the Mahdchohan and the pupil’s name and rank 
are entered by that Keeper of the Records of the Occult 
Hierarchy in His imperishable Record. 

The intervals of time between the various stages on 
the Probationary Path depend upon the initiative and 
the capabilities of the pupil. It may occasionally happen 
that behind some particular pupil there may exist a great 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 463 


accumulated karma of service which may give him the 
strength and the opportunities which others have not 
earned. Still a forceful and determined pupil may 
override all obstacles and “ enter the Path” swiftly, while 
one who lets opportunities slip by may have to spend 
decades in one stage before passing to the next. All 
pupils receive the inspiration of the Master equally, but 
each assimilates from it according to his own capacity. 

The probationary discipleship, the accepted disci- 
pleship and the sonship are merely personal relations 
between the Master and the pupil, and have nothing to do 
with Initiations or steps on the Path Proper, which are 
tokens of the man’s relation to the Great White Brother- 
hood and its august Head. 

QO. What is Initiation and what is its object ? 

Ans. It is the expansion of consciousness, the widening 
out of consciousness to embrace the superphysical as well 
as the physical, the ceremony of Initiation being a series 
of actual events through which a man, out of the physical 
body, passes in the presence of the great assembly of the 
Masters. The man with his expanded consciousness as 
with a new sense conferred on him, with the key of know- 
ledge opening up to him new vistas of power and know- 
ledge for the service of humanity, becomes conscious of a 
new world which then comes within his power of study, 
within his faculty to investigate and to know. On the 
three lower planes—the physical, the astral and the 
mental, often spoken of as “ the three worlds,” the well- 
known Triloki or Tribhuvanam of the Hindu cosmogony 
—is proceeding the normal evolution of humanity. On 
the next two planes—spiritual, those of Wisdom and Power, 
the Buddhic and the Atmic—goes on the specific evolution 
of the Initiate, after the First of the Great Initiations. 


464 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


The First Initiation admits the disciple as a member 
of the lowest rank in that great Brotherhood which governs 
the world. The Initiation is given by an appointed Member 
of the Brotherhood in the Name of the One Initiator, 
and the ceremony of Initiation is an official examina. 
tion, demonstrating the candidate’s fitness so to use 
the new powers to be conferred on him that he may 
become a better helper in the world of men. The mysteries 
of Greece and Rome, as well as modern Freemasonry, are 
faint imitations of the real ceremony itself and of the tests 
which the candidate undergoes. 

Most people when they think of Initiation have in 
mind a step to be gained for themselves. They think of 
the Initiate as a man who has developed himself very 
highly, and has become a great and glorious figure, as 
compared with the man of the outer world. That is true; 
but the importance of Initiation does not lie in the exalt- 
ation of an individual, but in the fact that he has now 
become definitely one with a great Order, the ‘ Communion 
of Saints’, as it is very beautifully put in the Christian 
Church, though few ever pay attention to the real meaning 
of those words. 

The entry into the Brotherhood of Those who rule 
the world is the third of the great critical points in man’s 
evolution. The first of these is when he becomes a man— 
when he individualises out of the animal kingdom and 
obtains a causal body. The second is what is called by 
the Christian, ‘conversion’ and by the Hindu, the acquire- 
ment of discrimination, or Viveka, as explained before. 
The third point is the most important of all, for the 
Initiation which admits him to the ranks of the Brother- 
hood also insures him against the possibility of failure to 
fulfil the divine purpose in the time appointed for it in the 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 465 


present stream of evolution, and not drop out at the ‘ Day 
of Judgment’ in the next Round. Hence those who have 
reached this point are called in the Christian system the 
‘elect,’ the ‘saved’ or the ‘safe’. The words used in 
admitting a candidate to the Great Brotherhood at the 
stately ceremony of the First Initiation include that very 
verse: “ You are now safe for ever ; you have now entered. 
upon the stream; may you soon reach the further shore ” 
—the further shore being Adeptship, the next great stage 
for the Initiate. 

Of these Initiations—these ceremonials on the Path 
leading to Perfection—there are five, the Fifth being that 
of the Adept (or the Master). At the First Great Initiation 
there is the definite union of the ego and the personality 
of the candidate. He has to pass the Second, Third and 
Fourth Initiations before he reaches Adeptship, which is 
the Fifth; but when he gains that Fifth, he unites the 
Monad and the ego just as before he had united the ego 
and the personality; so that when he has achieved the 
union of the higher and the lower self—when his person- 
ality no longer exists except as an expression of the ego— 
he has to begin the very same process over again, as it 
were, and make that ego an expression of the Monad 
before attainment of Adeptship, which signalises his 
departure from the human kingdom and his entry into the 
superhuman. 

Q. What, then, is the Path which finally leads to 
Perfection ? 

Ans. The Path leading to Initiation and thence to the 
Perfecting of man is recognised in all great religions, and 
its chief features a-e described in similar terms. In the 
Roman Catholic teachings it is divided into three parts: 


1.The Path of Purification or Purgation. 2. The Path 
59 


466 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


of Illumination. 3. The Path of Union with Divinity. 
Among the Musalmans, in the Sufi—mystic—teachings of 
Islam, it is known as the Way, the Truth and the Life. 
In Hinduism and Buddhism we find it divided into two 
parts, again subdivided. The Probationary Path of the 
Hindu and the Buddhist, where certain moral qualifica- 
tions have to be developed, is the Path of Purification of 
the Christian. For this portion of the Path, while the 
Christian lays more stress on the passive fact of purifica- 
tion, the Eastern lays more stress on the active acquire- 
ment of high qualifications—one rather the negative side, 
and the other the active side of positive achievement. 
The Path of Holiness, the second part of the Path accord- 
ing to the Hindu and the Buddhist, is divided into four 
Stages, of which the first two represent the Path of 
Illumination, and the last two the Path of Union, of 
the Christian. Each of these four stages is marked 
by an expansion of consciousness and is entered by 
a special Initiation, symbolised among Christians as 
the Birth, Baptism, Transfiguration, and Crucifixion 
and Resurrection of the Christ. At the end of the 
fourth stage comes the attainment of Adeptship, (or 
Masterhood,) Liberation, Final Salvation, symbolised by 
the Ascension of the Christ and the Descent of the Holy 
Spirit. 

Q. On what conditions or qualifications does the friness 
for Initiation of the pupil depend 7? 

Ans. The question as to whether a man is approaching 
fitness for Initiation involves three separate sets of con- 
siderations, all depending upon one another. The first Is 
as to whether he is in possession of a sufficient amount of 
the necessary qualifications as laid down in At the Feet 
of the Master, and that means that he must have a 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 467 


minimum of all, and very much more than a minimum of 
some of them. Secondly, the ego must have so trained 
his lower vehicles that he can function perfectly through 
them when he wishes to do so ; he must have effected what 
in our earlier Theosophical literature was called the 
junction of the lower and the higher self—of the personality 
and the ego; and thirdly, he must be strong enough to 
stand the great strain involved, which extends even to the 
physical body. 

Q. At what level of progress ts a pupil initiated ? 

Ans. There is a great variety as to the levels of 
progress at which pupils are initiated. All Initiates are 
unequal in development just as all men who have taken 
the degree of M.A. are unequal in knowledge. A man 
might have done exceedingly well in many of the subjects 
required, and be far beyond the total minimum, and yet 
be seriously deficient and below the minimum standard in 
one subject; it would, then, of course be necessary for him 
to wait till he had the minimum in that neglected subject, 
and no doubt while he was acquiring that, he would be 
developing the others still further. It is therefore obvious 
that while there is a certain attainment required for 
Initiation, some of those who are presented for it may 
have achieved far more than that in some directions. It 
will be thus seen that there is likely to be considerable 
variation in the interval between Initiations. One man 
who has just now been able to take the First, may never- 
theless possess a considerable share of the qualifications 
for the Second ; therefore for him the interva] between the 
two might be unusually short. On the other hand, a 
candidate who had only just sufficient strength -in all 
directions to enable him to pass through the First, would 
have slowly to develop within himself all the additional 


468 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


faculties and knowledge necessary for the Second, so his 
interval would probably be long. 

We have now entered upon a period in the world’s 
history in which progress at all levels of evolution can be 
very rapid, because the near coming of the World-Teacher 
has set up so strong a tide of thought and feeling about 
spiritual things, all in the direction of progress, that 
anyone who now makes an effort along that line finds 
himself swimming with the current and advancing swiftly. 

A rapid occult progress is a very decided strain, and 
the student of occultism who sets before himself the idea 
of hastening his development should remember that one of 
the necessities is good physical health. He wishes to make 
in one life the progress which under ordinary circumstances 
would be distributed over fifty or more, and as the 
amount that has to be done is the same in either case, for 
no reduction whatever has been made in the standard of 
the requirements for Initiation, he must obviously work all 
his vehicles very much harder if he is to succeed. 

Hitherto, except very rarely, persons have been 
initiated only after their physical bodies have come to 
mature age, and after they have proved by their activities 
in life that their hearts are pledged to the work of the 
Logos. During the last few years, however, certain egos 
whose bodies are still young have been given the privilege 
of Initiation, and this has been done in order that when 
the Lord comes He may find a band of young workers 
ready to serve Him. On His arrival, the World-Teacher 
will wield the wondrous consciousness of the Brotherhood, 
and the more helpers dwelling in physical bodies that He 
can draw round Him at any given place, the more will His 
work be facilitated. He can use the services of any 
ordinary man of the world to the extent of that man’s 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 469 


capacity; but one who is already an accepted pupil of the 
Master would be of far more use to Him in many directions 
than the man of the world could ever be; and of almost 
infinitely greater use still would be one who had passed the 
portal of Initiation and had awakened all the multiple 
links which bind together the members of the Brotherhood. 
It is always the ego who is initiated ; the age of the physt- 
cal body which it happens to be holding at a given time 
has little to do with the case. 

QO. How, then, does the pupil get initiated and become 
a member of the Great White Brotherhood ? 

Ans. When the Master, after close identification of the 
pupil’s consciousness with His own, is satisfied with him— 
coincident usually just before or after sonship—He presents 
him before the Brotherhood for the solemn ceremony of 
the First Initiation. The candidate is proposed and 
seconded by two of the higher members of the Brotherhood 
—of the rank of Adepts—one of Them being his own 
Master. The presentation is made in the first instance to 
the Mahachohan, who then appoints one of the Masters to 
act as the Hierophant Initiator. Either in the Hall of 
Initiation, or in some other appointed place, the candidate 
is then formally initiated at a stately ceremony by the 
Hierophant Initiator, who in the name of the One Initiator 
receives the plighted vow of the candidate, and puts in his 
hand the new key of knowledge which he is to use on the 
level now attained. 

Of the account of a First Initiation given to a 
candidate on the night of May 27th, 1915, it is said: * In 
this case the Lord Maitreya was the Initiator, and con- 
sequently the ceremony took place in His garden. When 
the Master Morya or the Master Kuthumi performs the 
rite, it is usually held in the ancient cave-temple, the 


470 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


entrance to which is near the bridge across the river 
between Their houses. There was a large gathering of the 
Adepts, all those whose names are familiar to us being 
present. The glorious garden was at its best; the rhodo- 
dendron bushes were one blaze of crimson blossom, and 
the air was fragrant with the scent of the early roses. The 
Lord Maitreya sat in His usual place on the marble seat 
which runs round the great tree in front of His house; and 
the Masters grouped Themselves in a semicircle on His 
right and left, on seats which were placed for Them on the 
grass terrace from which the marble seat rises by a couple 
of steps. But the Lord Vaivasvata Manu and the Maha- 
chohan sat also on the marble seat, one on each side of the 
arms of the specially raised carved throne which faces 
exactly south, which is called the Throne of Dakshina- 
murti.”’ 

What happens to the candidate is truly an ‘ initia- 
tion,’ 1.e., a beginning. It is the beginning of a new form 
of existence, where the personality becomes steadily more 
and more a mere reflex of the ego, and the ego himself 
begins to draw upon the powers of the Monad. The soul 
of man is really that highest part of him which is the 
Monad; but from the moment when the Monad made the 
causal body out of the animal group-soul at individuali- 
sation, the ‘spark hangs from the Flame by the finest 
thread of Fohat”. The ego, though linked thus to the 
Monad, has had, up to the moment of Initiation, no means 
of communication with that highest aspect of himself. 
But at Initiation, at the call of the Hierophant, the 
Monad descends into the causal body to take the vow of 
Initiation, to pledge himself to devote all his life and all 
his strength thenceforth to promote the work of evolu- 
tion, to forget himself absolutely for the good of the world, 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 471% 


to make his life all love, even as God is all Love, and to 
keep secret those things which he is told to keep secret. 
From that moment, the ‘finest thread of Fohat’ becomes 
as a bundle of threads, and the ego, instead of hanging 
merely as a ‘spark,’ becomes as the end of a funnel, 
which reaches downwards from the Monad and brings life 
and light and strength to the candidate. 

After his Initiation, the candidate is taken by his 
Master, or by a senior pupil, to the Buddhic plane, to be 
taught to function there in his Buddhic vehicle. Here 
now happens what has not happened before. Each night 
when the pupil left his body to work on the astral or the 
mental plane, his physical body, or his astral—one or both 
as the case may be—has been left behind on the bed, to be 
donned when he returned to them. When he now leaves 
the higher mental plane for the Buddhic plane, he of 
course leaves his causal body; but this causal body, 
instead of remaining with the physical, astral and 
mental bodies, vanishes. When the pupil, from his 
Buddhic vehicle, looks down on to the higher mental 
plane, no causal body is there any longer to represent 
him. The Christ said: “He that loseth his life for 
My sake shall find it.’ As Christ represents the 
Buddhic principle, the words mean: ‘He who for My 
sake—for the Christ development within him—will put 
aside the causal body in which he has been living for so long 
will find himself—will find the truer, grander and higher 
life.” It needs some courage to doit. The first time a 
man is wholly in the Buddhic vehicle and finds that his 
causal body upon which he has been depending all these 
thousands of years has vanished—it is rather startling, 
and yet that is the way. He must lose his life for Christ’s 
sake, if he wants to find it for all eternity. It is true that 


472 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


when the pupil-initiate returns from his Buddhic body, he 
finds himself in a causal body again; but it is not the 
causal body which he has had for millions of years since 
the day of individualisation, but a causal body which is a 
replica of that age-long house of his. With his first 
Buddhic experience the Initiate understands that he is not 
the ego, but something more transcendental, and also 
knows, not merely believes on faith, the Unity of all that 
lives—how all men’s lives, their griefs as well as joys, 
failures as well as successes, are inseparable from his life. 
To attain to the level of the First Great Initiation, 
a man must dominate his body by means of his soul; he 
must so arrange that all his feelings are in harmony with 
the highest feeling. When the second of the great steps 
comes, the same process is carried a stage further, and the 
man’s mind, and not only his feelings, is brought into tune 
with his Master’s mind. It is of course, still infinitely 
below it, for he is only man, and very frail and human, 
while the Master rises above humanity as a Superman ; 
but nevertheless the pupil’s thoughts should lie along the 
line of his Master’s thoughts. Just as the man who is 
beginning to tread the Path says: ‘“ In these circumstances, 
what would the Master have done? Let me do the same.” 
So the man who has passed the second stage should watch 
his thought every moment, and say to himself: “ What 
would the Master have thought in such a case as this? 
How would this thing have envisaged itself to him?” 
Of these Initiations—these great ceremonials on the 

Path Proper—there are five as stated before. 

Q. How do we find these Initiations among the 
Christian doctrines ? 

Ans. The life of the Christ is not only a historical 
record, but is also the story of the unfolding human spirit 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 473 


through the gateways of Initiation. He in whom the 
Christ is born, the Christ-child, the new Initiate, is spoken 
of all over the world as the ‘little child’ born in the new 
life of the spirit; and the expansion of consciousness he 
attains consists in his having opened to him the great 
spiritual world, in which all truths are known by intuition 
and not reasoning, knowledge becoming intuitive instead of 
rational. Because of the new world into which he is born, 
he is called twice-born ; born on earth indeed many times, 
but always born into the life of matter ; born now into the 
life of the spirit, which becomes his for evermore ; and so 
also the First Great Initiation is spoken of as the ‘ second 
birth,’ the ‘ birth of the Spirit’. 

Thus the First Initiation is symbolised among the 
Christians by the Birth of the Christ when the Star in the 
East rises over the young Child; the gecond by the Bap- 
tism where the Spirit descends upon Him and dwells with 
Him for evermore; the Third by the Transfiguration on 
the Mount, where the inner Deity shines through. The 
Fourth Initiation is indicated by the suffering in the 
Garden of Gethsemane, the Crucifixion and the Resurrec- 
tion of the Christ, while the Fifth is the Initiation of the 
Master, of the Perfected Man who has attained to the 
Stature of the fulness of the Christ, the Saviour of men, 
and is symbolised by the Ascension and the Descent of 
the Holy Spirit. 

The First Initiation is aptly symbolised in the 
mystery-drama by the Birth of the Christ, because at 
that stage there arises within the man a great change 
and a new power, which is well expressed by the idea 
of a birth. At the Second, there is a wonderful down- 
pouring of force from the Initiator to the candidate, 


which is typified by the Baptism of the Christ, or rather 
60 


474 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


by the Baptism of which He spoke—that of the Holy 
Ghost and of Fire; for it is the power of the Third 
Person. of the Blessed Trinity that is outpoured at 
that moment, descending in what may but inadequately 
be described as a flood of fire, a flaming tide of 
living light. | 

The Third Initiation is typified in Christian 
symbolism by the Transfiguration of the Christ. He 
went up into an high mountain apart, and was trans- 
figured before His disciples: ‘‘ His face did shine as the 
sun, and His raiment was white as the light,” “ exceeding 
white as snow, so as no fuller on earth can white them ”’. 
This description suggests the Augoeides, the glorified 
man, and it is an accurate picture of what happens at this 
Initiation, for just as the Second Great Initiation is 
principally concerned with the quickening of the lower 
mental body, so at this stage the causal body is especially 
developed. The ego is brought more closely into touch 
with the Monad, and is thus transfigured in very truth. 
Even the personality is affected by that wondrous 
outpouring. The higher and the lower self became one 
at the First Initiation, and that unity is never lost, but 
the development of the higher self that now takes place 
can never be mirrored in the lower worlds of form, although 
the two are one to the greatest possible extent. 

Now in these steps, especially in the third, not 
only does the man come face to face with himself, with 
the God within him (the Monad to the ego, the ego to 
the personality, each is the higher self in relation to 
that which is below it), but he comes face to face also 
with the ‘King’, the One Initiator. In His name all 
Initiations are given, but in the first and second steps some 
Master acts for Him as a Deputy or Hierophant- Initiator, 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 475 


although He acts only with the King’s express per- 
mission through the Mahachohan, as _ stated before. 
But the man who is so fortunate as to reach the third 
great step must come face to face with the King who, 
at this third step, either confers the Initiation Himself, 
or deputes one of His Pupils, the three Lords of the 
Flame who came with Him from Venus, to do so; and 
in the latter event the man is presented to the King soon 
after the Initiation has taken place. Thus the Christ ts 
brought into the presence of His Father; the Buddhi 
in the Initiate is raised until it becomes one with its 
origin on the Nirvanic plane, and a very wonderful union 
between the first and the second principles in man is 
then effected. That is why, in connection with the Feast 
of the Transfiguration comes also the Feast of the 
Presentation of Christ in the Temple, sometimes called the 
Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary, or Candlemas 
Day. 

The mystery-drama of the Christ-life symbolises 
not only man’s progress, but also the descent of the 
Second Logos, the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity 
into matter. First came the Annunciation, when the 
Third Person of the Blessed Trinity sends the First 
Outpouring down into matter, and so hovers over and 
permeates the virgin seas of matter which are typified in 
the Christian system by the Blessed Virgin Mary, whose 
Latin name, Maria, is plural of Maree, the sea. So she is 
the seas of matter of the different planes. The whole 
thing is a vast and beautiful allegory, in which that first 
descent is symbolised by the Annunciation; and a long 
time after that—the way having been slowly prepared by 
that Third Aspect, God the Holy Ghost—the Second 
Aspect, God the Son, descends into matter, and is born as on 


476 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


Christmas Day. But that fructification of matter, that 
vivifying of it, takes time; and so in the allegory it shows 
its result forty days later in the Festival of the Purification 
of the great seas of matter, which means their vivification 
and their elevation by the presence in them, the blossoming 
out through them, of this Second great Aspect. This 
result appears when the new-born Christ is presented to 
the Father; that is to say, when the Third Outpouring 
which comes from the First Aspect, the First Person of 
the Blessed Trinity, comes upon it; and that perfected 
purification of matter is typified by the presentation of the 
Christ in His House, His Temple, to His Father. 

The Fourth Initiation differs from all the others in 
that it has this strange double aspect of suffering and 
victory. Each of the earlier Initiations was symbolised in 
the Christian system by one definite fact, the Birth, the 
Baptism, the Transfiguration; but in order to represent 
this Fourth Initiation, a series of events has been found 
necessary. The Crucifixion and all the varied sufferings 
of which it was the culmination were employed to typify 
one side of this Initiation, while the Resurrection with its 
triumph over death represents the other side. Always at 
this stage there is suffering, physical, astral and mental ; 
always there is the condemnation by the world, and the 
apparent failure; always there is the splendid triumph 
upon higher planes—which, however, remains unknown to 
the outer world. The peculiar type of suffering which 
invariably accompanies this Initiation clears off any arrears 
of karma which may still stand in the Initiate’s way ; and 
the patience and joyousness with which he endures them 
have great value in the strengthening of his character, and 
help to determine the extent of his usefulness in the work 
which lies before him. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 477 


The Crucifixion and the Resurrection which sym- 
bolise the actual Initiation are thus described in an ancient 
Egyptian formula : 

‘Then shall the candidate be bound upon the 
wooden cross, he shall die, he shall be buried, and shall 


descend into the under-world ; after the third day he shall 
be brought back from the dead.” 


In Christian symbolism the Ascension and the 
Descent of the Holy Spirit stand for the attainment of 
Adeptship, for the Adept does ascend clear above humanity, 
beyond this earth, although if He so chooses, as did the 
Christ, He may return to teach and help. As He ascends, 
He becomes one with the Holy Spirit, and invariably the 
first thing He does with His new power is to pour it down 
upon His disciples, even as the Christ poured down tongues 
of fire upon the heads of His followers at the feast of 
Pentecost. The triple Atma, the threefold Spirit of man, 
lies in the lower part of the Nirvdnic or Spiritual plane, 
while the lowest manifestation of the Third Person, God 
the Holy Spirit, is in the higher part of the same plane. 
The Adept becomes one with the latter at that level and 
that is the real explanation of the Christian feast of 
Whitsun Day, the festival of the Holy Spirit. 

This is the ancient pathway called the ‘ Kingdom 
of Heaven’ or the ‘Kingdom of God’; also called the 
‘Way of the Cross’; and the Cross is the symbol of life, 
of life triumphant over death, of Spirit triumphant over 
matter. There is no difference in the Path between the 
East and the West. There is only one occult teaching 
and one Great White Lodge. The Guardians of the 
spiritual treasures cf our race recognise only qualifications 
and open the Gateway in the ancient fashion, which allows 
the man to tread the narrow, ancient Path. Those who 


478 : THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


seek find, and to those who knock, the door is opened : 
before those who knock with the hammer of the four 
qualifications, the door is swung open that they may find 
Him. Five, including the first, are the Portals on the 
Path, the fifth leading to the final divine Perfection of 
Manhood ; and the life of the Initiate, between the First and 
the Fifth Great Initiation—with the initial stage of the 
Birth of the Christ and the final one of the attainment of 
His full stature—is spoken of as the Christ-life. 

QO. What is the life of the new Initiate and what ts his 
work to fulfil the tdeal of Divine Manhood, to attain 
liberatson or final salvation ? 

Ans. We now come to the Path Proper with its four 
Stages, the full treading of which with the crossing of the 
fifth portal makes a disciple on the Path Superman as 
he attains his goal at the Fifth Great Initiation. Each 
Initiation must be prepared for by adequate experience 
and self-training. The First Initiation corresponds to the 
matriculation which admits a student to a University, and 
the attainment of Adeptship to the taking of a degree at 
the end of a course. Continuing the simile, there are 
three intermediate examinations, usually spoken of as the 
Second, Third and Fourth Initiations, Adeptship being 
the Fifth. 

The stages on the Path of Holiness, as this process 
of spiritual unfoldment is called, are marked by expansions 
of consciousness, as stated before, and by the gift by the 
Great White Brotherhood of new knowledge and new 
powers to the Initiate. But before he can pass from one 
stage to another, the Brotherhood requires from hima 
record of work done for humanity, a freedom from 
specified mental and moral defects, and the possession of 
certain spiritual faculties. In particular, there are ten 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 479 


Samyojana, or fetters, which bind man to the circle of 
rebirth and hold him back from Nirvana, and which the 
pledged disciple—the Initiate—must therefore cast off one 
by one, before he can finally attain Adeptship. Here the 
Guru takes upon Himself the guidance, instruction and 
guardianship of His Chela who must now be entirely 
free of these clogs and must develop every quality 
completely, and not partially as during the probationary 
stage. The inner life of the disciple is full of joy, but it 
is not a life of ease, as the work which he has to do—the 
work of compression, into a few short lives, of the evolution 
of millions of years—often involves a terrible strain on his 
vehicles. He has to be very careful in everyday trifles, 
because, leading the occult life, he knows that “ Trifles 
make perfection, and perfection is notrifle”. Inthe world 
of men his sincerity of purpose is often mistrusted, he is 
rejected and despised by all who surround him, and 
personal motives are attributed to him in all that he does. 
I. After the First Great Initiation, after the Birth 

of the Christ within the pupil, he, who so far was Pari- 
vrajaka (the Wanderer, one who feels no place in the three 
lower worlds as his abiding-place or refuge) according to 
the Hindu, becomes Kutichaka, the Builder, the builder of 
the vehicles that he requires, or he who builds a hut; he has 
reached a place of peace. For the Buddhist he is Sotapatti 
or Sohan, “ He who has entered the stream,” the further 
side of which is Masterhood. The Initiate now must 
completely eradicate three weaknesses of human nature, 
must utterly get rid of three fetters which hold him back. 
1. The delusion of self, or the sense of separate- 

ness (Sakkayaditthi). The sense that he is separate from 
another, the ‘I am 1’ consciousness which, as connected 
with the personality is nothing but an illusion, is stil] hard 


480 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


to get rid of. But the First Initiation having brought hima 
touch of the Buddhic plane, the Chela has felt the complete 
unity of all that is ; and when the Initiate realises that, he 
realises his identity with the vagabond and the sinner as 
well as with the highest saint. 

2. Doubt or uncertainty (Vichikichcha). This 
does not mean that a blind unreasoning adhesion to certain 
dogmas Is claimed or unquestioning faith is demanded from 
the disciple. The casting off of this fetter means the arriv- 
ing at absolute certainty, based either upon individual 
experience and personal first-hand knowledge or upon 
mathematical reasoning. The doubt which the pupil must 
for ever leave behind is that regarding certain facts in 
nature—facts of reincarnation and karma, of the existence 
of the Masters, and of the efficacy of the method of 
attaining the highest good by the Path of Holiness. There 
are many stages in doubt, from rank disbelief to the 
acceptance of a truth as a ‘ working hypothesis’. A lofty 
idealism, based on working hypotheses, will lead a man 
through the gates of Initiation; but there comes a time 
when some at least of his working hypotheses must be living 
facts of his inmost consciousness—facts, not accepted on 
authority or blind belief, but known to be true because, by 
outer observation and inward realisation, they are evermore 
part of his individuality. 

3. Superstition: taking the unessential for the 
essential and the outer ceremony for the inner reality 
(Silabbatapardamasa). This fetter to be cast off compre- 
hends all kinds of unreasoning or mistaken belicf, all 
dependence on the‘ efficacy of outer rites and ceremonies. 
The pupil knows that rites and ceremonies have their place 
in human evolution acting as bridges for ordinary men to 
reach the unseen reality, but that they are no longer 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 481 


necessary for him who has learnt to depend upon himself 
alone. Above all, he is free from the superstition of the 
wrath of the Power behind evolution, and knows that all 
that exists is within the Universal Love. 

II. After the pupil has #tterly cast aside the three 
fetters he passes the Second Initiation. But before he 
can proceed to the Second Initiation, the Initiator of that 
occasion demands evidence as to how the candidate has 
used the powers acquired by him at the First Initiation, 
and one of the most beautiful features of the ceremony 
is the part when thosc who have been helped by the 
candidate comc forward to give their testimony. It is 
also requisite for this Initiation that the candidate shall 
have devcloped the power to function freely in his mental 
body, for although the ceremony of the First Initiation is 
held on the astral plane, that of the Second takes place in 
the lower mental world. 

If the Lord Maitreya acts as Initiator, the cere- 
mony usually takes place either in His garden or in His 
great room. He Himself is present in His physical body, 
and so in many cases is the Lord Vaivasvata Manu, who 
lives close by. All others present are usually in the astral 
vehicle in the case of the First Initiation, but in the 
mental body in the case of the Second. The Great Ones 
present focus Their consciousnesses with perfect ease at 
whatever level is required, and there is of course on the 
astral and mental planes a perfect counterpart of every- 
thing on the physical. 

The pupil is now Bahiidaka (Baha Udaka or Many 
Waters—he who goes on pilgrimages at holy places) accord- 
ing to the Hindu. For the Buddhist he is Sakadagami— 
‘‘ the man who returns but once ’—which means that he who 


has reached that level should need but one more incarnation 
6] 


482 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


before attaining Arhatship, the Fourth Initiation, after 
which there is no compulsory physical rebirth. Thus only 
one more physical birth is obligatory on him, and at the 
end of his next phvsical life, having already attained 
Arhatship, he can, if he so chooses, complete the remain- 
ing stages of the Path without returning to incarnation. 
In the Gospel story, which, rightly read, is less the history 
of a Person, than a mighty drama of the Initiation of the 
Spirit, it is called the Baptism, when the Spirit of God 
came down upon Jesus and abode with Him. The Spirit 
which comes down is the Spirit of Intuition ; and before 
he can go further, the pupil must lcarn to bring it down 
through his enlarged causal and mental bodies to his 
physical consciousness, so that it may ‘abide on him’ 
and guide him. 

During this period which is usually one of con- 
siderable psychic and intellectual advancement no addi- 
tional fetters are cast off, but the pupil has to build up 
and perfect all his subtle bodies and thus develop psychic 
faculties and acquire superphysical powers belonging to 
perfect superphysical bodies. He now has astral con- 
sciousness at his command during his waking life, and 
during sleep the heaven-world will be open before him— 
for the consciousness of a man when away from his 
physical body is always onc stage higher than it is while 
he is still burdened with the house of flesh. This stage, 
during which a very great and rapid devclopment of the 
mental body takes place, is, as a rule, a short one after 
which the pupil passes the third Portal. 

III. The aspirant who has passed the third great 
Portal, called Transfiguration in the Christian story, is 
spoken of by the Hindu as the Hamsa, the Swan, the bird 
of heaven, the symbol of the recognition of the ‘I’ as 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 483 


one with God; he who realises ‘I am That’. For the 
Buddhists he then becomes Anigami, ‘‘ he who does not 
return,” so called because it is expected of him that he will 
attain the next Initiation—Arhatship—in the same incarna- 
tion and because, consequently, birth in a physical body, 
unless he so chooses, is no longer necessary In order to 
attain to the final goal. The work can be done in the 
invisible worlds, and the Initiate can, from there, if he so 
decides, proceed to the Fifth Initiation. 

During the time intervening between the 
Third and Fourth Initiations he has finally to get rid of 
the remains of two more weaknesses. 

4. Attachment to the enjoyment of sensation typi- 
fied by earthly love (Kamaraga). It is not by any means that 
he will not feel the attraction of what is pleasant or beautiful 
or clean, nor the repulsion of the opposites of these things, 
and will not take them into account in the course of his 
work. But he will not Iet them be a deciding element in 
duty, and will override them entirely on those emergency 
occasions when it is necessary for his work. We see in the 
Gospel allegory how the Christ threw aside the attraction 
of all that would hold Him back from the approaching 
Passion. But the noblest human love never dies; his love 
for humanity has increased and widened till it embraces 
all with the same fervour which at first was lavished on one 
or two; though, while gaining this wide affection, all his 
affection for his closer friends—that between egos—is 
enormously intensified and becomes that “ perfect love that 
casteth out fear ”’. 

9. All possibility of anger or hatred (Patigha). 
At this stage he is willing to help an enemy as readily as a 
friend, and takes as much joy in helping a foe as in the 
helping of the dearest relative. In the Gospel allegory we 


484 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


see how all repulsion had ended for the Christ when “ the 
woman who was a sinner’ was allowed to approach Him, 
to bathe His feet with her tears, to wipe them with her hair. 
The disciple here learns to rise above attraction and 
repulsion. 

IV. Between the Third Initiation and the Fourth 
there is the gulf of silence where the disciple hangs alone in 
the void with nothing on earth to trust to, nothing in heaven 
to look to, with even the vision of the Supreme blurred 
and dimmed as symbolised by the Agony in the Garden. 
Passing onward through the stages of the Passion he sees 
himself betrayed, denied, rejected, held up upon the cross 
of agony for all men to mock at and to despise ; hears the 
taunt of his enemies: “ He saved others, himself he cannot 
save,” utters the cry of the breaking heart: ‘* My God, 
my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?” finds himself in 
that uttermost loneliness for evermore, and losing the 
God without him, ultimately finds the God within. 

Then the Fourth Initiation—the Crucifixion and 
the Resurrection of the Christ—is accomplished. He 
it is who has become the Christ crucified and therefore the 
helper of the world. Loneliness for him is over for ever, 
for he has found the One Life and knows it for evermore. 
He becomes the Paramahamsa, “ He who is beyond the ‘ I 
am He’” according to the Hindu phraseology, where 
there is no longer even the distinction between ‘I’ and 
‘He,’ but where there is only the One; the Arhat, ‘ the 
Venerable,’ the Perfect, the Worthy, according to the 
Buddhist nomenclature, with no more compulsory incarna- 
tion for him. Henceforth the consciousness of the 
Buddhic plane is his while still in the physical body, 
and when he leaves that body in sleep or trance, he passes 
at once into the unutterable glory of the Nirvanic plane. 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 485 


At this stage, between the Resurrection and the 
Ascension of the Christian drama, he has completely to 
cast off five more weaknesses or fetters. When he stands 
upon the step of Arhatship, half his path from the First 
Initiation to Adeptship may be said to have been trodden, 
for he has then cast off five of the ten great fetters in an 
average of seven incarnations, and before him lies the task 
of casting off the remaining five, for which also, if he so 
chooses, an average of seven incarnations is allowed, though 
this average is in no sense a rule. The five remaining 
fetters of which the last remnants have to be cast off are: 

6. Desire for beauty of form or for existence 
in a form (Riparaga), either in the physical or even in the 
heaven-world. All clinging to life in form is to be 
thrown off. 

7. Desire for formless life (Ariparadga), on the 
highest and formless planes of the heaven-world or even 
on the Buddhic plane, which would merely be a less 
sensual form of selfishness. 

8. Pride (Maino), Ahamkdara, the ‘I’-making 
faculty which realises itself as apart from others. 

9. Agitation or irritability (Uddhachcha). He 
must be perfectly unruffled by anything whatever that 
might happen to him. 

10. Ignorance (Avijji). He must get rid of all 
that stands in the way of his acquisition of perfect know- 
ledge as regards our planetary chain. 

All the attributes and faculties are developed by the 
Chela in himself with very little help beyond guidance from 
his Master. “An Adept,” says an occult aphorism, “ be- 
comes. He is not made.” 

V. The Initiate then passes through the Fifth 
Initiation, symbolised by the Ascension and the Descent of 


486 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


the Holy Spirit, and becomes the Jivanmukta, the liberated 
life, of the Hindu ; the Asekha, one who has no more to 
learn, of the Buddhist. With the cycle of humanity 
accomplished and the ideal of Divine Manhood fulfilled, 
He stands the Perfect Man, Master of life and death, 
freed from all fetters that can bind, and with all powers 
given to Him in heaven and on earth. He has been born 
for the last time and has attained final salvation. He has 
gained eternal life and stands among the many Brethren of 
whom the Christ is the First-born, has “‘ become a pillar 
in the temple of my God who shall go out no more,” and 
has now attained to the stature of the fulness of the Christ. 

QO. How does the Adept now become a Master ? 

Ans. Having accomplished His pilgrimage, the Adept 
now sees, as stated before, seven paths stretching before 
Him, seven paths of glory and of power, leading Him on- 
wards in the great realms of superphysical life, all of which, 
Save one, free Him for ever from the burden of human 
flesh, and stretch onward, far away from our earth. As 
He stands gazing at these seven pathways, through the 
exquisite music which surrounds Him, there sounds a sob 
of pain, and He hears a cry from the world in its darkness, 
in its misery, in its spiritual starvation, in its moral degra- 
dation—the cry of humanity in bondage—and sces the 
gropings of the ignorant, the helpless and the blind. Then 
out of compassion, out of old sympathy for the humanity 
of which He is the flower, He turns backward to the world 
that He had left, and instead of casting away the burden 
of the flesh He takes it up and bears it still, in order that 
He may help humanity. By treading the Path of Holiness, 
He has reached Perfection, has conquered death and won 
Immortality ; He has achieved Freedom and lives in the 
Eternal. But being Perfect, He remains to help us who 


THE MASTERS AND THE WAY TO THEM 487 


are imperfect; having realised Eternity, He stays amid 
the shadows of time until we also realise ; He has opened 
the gateway of Bliss, and He holds it open, standing 
beside it, that we may all enter in before Him, for He who 
was the first to achieve has made Himself the last to enjoy. 
His feelings may be very faintly echoed thus in the words 
of Mrs. Annie Besant : 

“TJ will not have final peace till my brothers share 
it; I will not have final liberty that is not shared by my 
brothers and enjoyment which is not theirs. I will not take 
Nirvana for myself and leave my brothers in the bonds of 
birth and death, in their ignorance and in their darkness, 
in their helplessness and in their folly. If I have won 
wisdom, I have won it for their enlightening. If I have 
won strength, I have won it for their service. If I have 
learnt to vibrate in agony for man, what avail is it then to 
throw aside the sheaths and go on where no agony is 
useful? I will stay where I am and will work for man. 
Every pain of man shall strike me. Every agony of man 
shall touch me, and shall wring my heart. Every folly of 
man shall be my folly by identification with humanity, and 
every sin and crime of theirs my suffering until the whole 
of us are free.” 

And so He becomes what we call a Master, a link 
between God and man, a liberated Spirit who is still 
willing to bear the burden of the flesh, in order that He 
may not lose close contact with the humanity that He 
loves, and who puts Himself at human service by the 
supreme act of renunciation, to remain in bondage till 
all are frec, and to go to Nirvana when all can go hand 
in hand with Him. 

He and such as He, rising in grade beyond grade of 
superhuman wisdom and power, form the Occult Hier- 
archy which consists of the Guardians of the World, who 
remain with us to rule, to teach, to guide and definitely te 
help humanity along the difficult way of human evolution. 


488 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


He has become a Saviour of the world, and having 
suffered and conquered all He is able to ‘help to the 
uttermost,” not by substitution of person, but by identity 
of nature; not by taking the place of the weak or the 
sinner, but by infusing His own strength into the weak, 
by permeating the sinner with His purity. He thus 
knows the identity of nature which makes His the weak- 
ness of the weakest as well as the strength of the strongest, 
which makes His the sin of the guiltiest as well as the 
purity of the purest, and thus the lowest is as intensely 
loved as the highest, is as much part of Him as the loftiest 
and the purest. 

He aids the progress of humanity in countless ways 
as stated before. Every man that stretches out his hands, 
His hand is ready to help; of every brother of His race 
that asks for guidance, His heart answers to the cry. He 
is seeking through the world for some who have ears to 
hear the Wisdom, and who will answer His appeal for 
messengers to carry it to humanity at large, with the 
words: ‘* Here am I;send me.” He stands there waiting 
until we are willing to be taught, and give Him the 
opportunity which He has renounced Nirvana to secure. 

The Path to the Masters of the Wisdom is always 
open, and any one of us can tread it and achieve the goal 
that They have achieved ; born of the Eternal Spirit it is 
the true birth-right of the human Spirit to know his own 
Divinity and then to realise and manifest it, to know the 
possibilities of his own nature and then to fulfil the 
purpose for which he came into the world ; for the world 
exists for the unfolding of the Spirit and nothing less than 
Divinity is the true goal of man. 


SHANTI 


INDEX 


PAGE 


ABRAHAM 158 
Accidents, Karma of 
219—220 
of birth 200 
Accounts, Karmic 
220—221 
Action makes environ- 
ments 186, 188—190 
Motive of, affects 
character 201—203 
Motive of, has no 
effect on physical 
plane 20I—203 
Actions, What are 189 
Adaptability, Character- 
istic of 408 
Ray of 329, 408 
Adept, The, see Master 
How He becomes a 
Master 486—488 
Initiation of 465 
Seven Paths before 
338, 380—381, 486 
Why He needs a 
physical body 
Adepts, The 
see also Masters 
can trace Their past 


421 
345 


incarnations 174 
Number of, having 
physical bodies 418 


62 


PAGE 
Adepts, The 
Parishes of 419—420 
Why They prefer to 
live in the East 406 
Adeptship 465, 479, 485 
Attainment of 477 
Adhikari 456 
Adi plane 6x 
Adityas 34 
fEonian condemnation 246 
suspension 246 
Ether of space 37 
Agastya, Rishi 401—403, 
413 
Appearance of 403 


Historical achieve- 


ments of 402 
Residence of 402 
Transacting business 

403 
Work of 401—402 
Agnosticism 6 
Ahuramazda 35 
Akashic records 174 
Alban, S. 410 
Albigenses, The School 
of 160 
Alchemy 65 
Spiritual 443 
Alcoholic drinks, Effect 
of 39, 342 


490 THEOSOPHY 
PAGE 

Alexandrian School, The 
Jewish 152 
Amésha Spénta 54 
Ammonius Sacces 5 
Anesthesia, Local 95 
Anesthetics 93 
Andgami 483 
Ananias 438 
Angel evolution 381 


Angels 4, 54, 267, 377, 
385, 413 
Kingdoms of the 420 
of music 276 
of Nations 419 
Anger, Colour for, in 
astral body 85 
Disadvantages of 
301— 302 
Fetter of 483—484 
Method of purifying 
442—443 
Animal after death 
324—326 
and man, Difference 
between IOI, 
333—334 
Brotherhood to 369 
Cruelty to 31 
evolution 23 
form, Incarnation 
into 150, 171—173 
group-soul 324 
—326, 331, 332, 470 
Ill-treatment of 223 
Individualised, in 
heaven-world 
Karma of the 
-soul 101, 173, 
323—324 
Animals, Karma among 
222-——223 


261 
185 


EXPLAINED 
PAGE 
Animals, 
Why they should 
not be eaten 32—33 
Anuloma 455 
Annunciation, The 475 
Anupdadaka plane 61, 376 
Apollonius of Tyana = 409 
Apostle James, a vege- 
tarian 35 
James the Less, a 
vegetarian 35 
Matthew, a_ vege- 
tarian 35 


Peter, a vegetarian 35 


Architect, Divine 55, 379 
of the Universe 190 
The Great 36 

Argumentativencss 457 
Bar to occult pro- 

gress 449 
Effect of, on mental 
body 449 

Arhat, The 484 

Arhatship 482, 483, 485 
Condition of 174 


Aristotle, a vegetarian, 34 
Arnold’s (Sir Edwin) 
The Light of Asta 389 
Artificial clemental 263, 
207, 415, 416 


entities 267 

Human 267 
Arupa Loka 63, 276 
Aruparaga 485 
Aryan root-race 336, 


337, 338, 341, 388, 401 
Aryasanga, Master D. K. 


as 4x3 
pupil of Lord 
Maitreya 397 


INDEX 491 
PAGE PAGE 
i f the Christ, Astral body, The 
sas ° 466, 473, death 230, 242, 261, 269 
477, 485 Effect of rearrange- 
Asekha, The 486 ment after death 


Aspirant, An 
Attitude of, towards 


life 439 
Bigness necessary 

for 438 
Emotions necessary 

for 438 


Forms of selfishness 
to be removed by 
448—450 
How he _ catches 
attention of the 
Master 
How helped by the 
fi 427—429 
on the Path present- 
ed to the King 385 
Requirements from 
442 
435 


435 


to Discipleship 
Why he is subjected 
to test of time 446 
Aspirants, Why more are 
not taken as pupils 
436—439 
Karma of 
183, 187 
ideas 
109 


Aspiration, 


Association of 
during sleep 
Astral body, The 
Appearance of, seen 

clairvoyantly 286 
Change in, during 
sleep 87—88 
Concentric shells 
after death in 235, 
236, 237, 243 


in 236—237 
feels neither hungry 
nor cold 249 
Function of 84 
Functions of, during 
sleep 87—88 
has no separate 
organs 235 
How affected by 
mental body 86 
How affected by 
physical body 86 
How formed 163—166 
How to prevent 
rearrangement of, 
after death 237—238 
Improvement of 86 
is clothed by exercise 
of thought 249 
is fully developed for 
ordinary man 
Matter of 
Meaning of colours 
in 
New for each life 
Not discarded by 
high Initiates at 
death 176 
of advanced man 85 
of average man 


270 
86 


126 


during sleep 87 
of developed man 
during sleep 88 


of undeveloped man 84 
of undeveloped man 
during sleep 85, 87 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Astral body, The 


Rearranged in con- 
centric shells after 
death 235—238, 


240, 243 
Shape of 84 
Size of 84 
suffers not from 
disease 249 
Time of disturbance 
lasting in 286 
Use of 78 
Warts on 286, 287, 438 
What is 279 
When cast off 103 
Whirls in 286 
Astral consciousness 482 
corpse, Fate of the 
3 268—269 
counterpart 240, 242 


death 230, 242, 261, 269 

elemental 71—75, 
316, 447 

see also Desire- 

elemental 

elemental = essence 

72, 267, 289, 292, 
316, 370, 420 

elemental essence, 
How to change 75 

helper 241, 262, 
307, 436 

helper, Qualifica- 
tions for an 264—265 
lecture 435 

life, Advantage of 
good use of 266 

life after death, 
What is 242 
memory II, 117 


for 
Astral world, The 


PAGE 
Astral object, How per- 
ceived 236 
permanent atom 
163, 165 
plane 62 
shade 171, 267 


shade, What is 269 
shell 171, 263, 267, 277 
shell, What is 269 
slum 243 
subdivisions, Three 
classes in the 242 
work 459 
work, Qualifications 


454 


Arrangement of 
matter of its sub- 
divisions 240 

Average time for 
persons in 176— 

| 179, 260 

Extent of 67, 240 

Factors of detention 
in a_ section of 

259—260 

Inhabitants of 267—268 

Method of passing 


from 259, 261 
Movement in 243 
Possibilities for pro- 

gress In 290 


Rate of travel in 250 
Surroundings of 


242—245 
Time of passing 
from 259—260 


Two factors for 
length of stay in 
232—234 


INDEX | DS, 
PAGE PAGE 
Astral world, The Aura of the Lord of the 
Why we are uncon- World 384 
scious of 268 of the Mahachohan 399 
Astrologer 207, 209, 221 of the Master 398, 423 
Astrology and free-will of the teacher 424, 450 
206—207 Pranic 120 
Real 206 Shape of the 119 
Atlantean root-race 336, Size of the 119 
337, 338, 341, 387 What is the 119 
Atma 99, 100, 122, 385,477 Auras, Seven 121 


-Buddhi 321 
The triple 477 
What is 69, 100—101 
Atmic aspect 376 
body 102 
body, What is 103 
plane 62, 376 

Atonement, Church 

teaching on the 
doctrine of 197 
Vicarious 197—198 

At the Feet of the Master, 
referred to 466 


quoted 304, 335, 453 


Editions of 452 
Translations of 452 
Augoeides 414 
What ts 79 
Aura 117 


Colours in the 119 —121 
Component parts of 
the 
Health-, What is 
Higher Manasic 121 
Kamic 120 
Lower Manasic 120, 121 
of Lord Buddha 
392, 397 
of Lord Maitreya 
397-398 


119 
119 


Aureola of Saints 119—~121 


Auric egg 118, 119 
Austral-American sub- 
race 401 
Avarice 83 
Colour for, inmental 
body 82 
-Avesti 146 
Aviqqit 485 
BaBE, Death of a 133, 135 
Death of a, ex- 
plained by Rein- 
carnation 145—146 
Ego of a, dying 
young 145 
Bacon, Francis 411 
Roger 411 
Bahudaka 48r 


Bailey believed in Rein- 
carnation 148 
Balance (Samadhaina) 455 

Baptism, The 466, 
473—474, 476, 482 
of Jesus 395, 409 

of the Holy Ghost 
and of Fire 474 
Beauty by Art in Greece 13 
by Lawin Rome x3 
Key-note of 


I2 
Ray of 329, 408 


494 


PAGE 


Becquerel’s (M. Jean) 
observations of N- 


rays 92—93 
Belict i in God 49—5o 
Beri-beri . 25 
Besant, Dr. Annie, quot- 

ed 18, 487 
a vegetarian 35 


Bhagavad-Gita quoted 
15, 53, 56, 191, 195. 
202, 226—227, 350, 440 


Bhakti Yoga 440 
Bhishma 198 
Bible, The, quoted 186 
Authorised version 
of, edited 412 
Bigotry 18, 454 
Killed out by Theos- 
ophy 
Bigots 7 
Binah 55 
Birth, Accidents of 200 
of the Christ 473, 479 
of the Spirit 473 
Second 47353 
The 466, 473, 476 
Blavatsky, Madame 
H. P 


Disciple of Master 
N 403 


founded the T. 5S. 
5, 403 

met Master M. in 
London 404 


The Voice of the 
Silence given 
through 

wrote The Secret 
Doctrine and The 
Voice of the 
Silence 374 


409 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Bliss body 103 
see also Buddhic 
body 
Bodhisattva, The 368 


see also World- 
Teacher. 
Initiation of 
of a root-race 329, 
379, 380, 390, 418 
Representative of 
Lord Buddha 
takes birth as a 
child on first 
appearance in the 
world 
takes Buddha Initi- 
ation asthe crown 
of His work 
Bodies of man, Reason 
for various 77—78 
of man, Three im- 
mortal 102—103 
of man, Three 
mortal 102——103 
Body'-consciousness 71, 
72, 76, 91 
Bondage, Cause of 206 
Book of the Dead, The 146 
Booth, General W., a 
vegetarian 35 
W. B., a vegetarian 35 
Bose’s (Dr. J. C.) ex- 
periments on plant- 
life 90 
Brahmi 53, 55, 318, 376 
Brahmana and Brother- 


382 


387 


417 


383 


hood 364 

Dharma of the 345 
Braihmanas, Colonies of, 

in South India 402 


INDEX 495 
PAGE PAGE 
Brain consciousness Brotherhood ~ 
during sleep, Peculi- of Man in ancient 
arities of 108—109 world 363 
Brotherhood as duty of Man in social 
towards elemental system 360—361 


essence 370 
Law of 21, 364 
on lower planes 362 


Our, to lower king- 
doms 368—369 

Shewn to lower 
kingdoms by our 


help 369—370 
to animals 369 
Universal 4, 7, 9, 

47, 55, 368 


Brotherhood of Man, 
The 7, 12, 44, 47, 258 

of Man and caste 

system in India 
363—365 

of Man and equality 
359—360 

Basis of 
358 
of Man, Duty to- 

wards elders 
of Man, Duty to- 

wards equals 
of Man, Duty to- 

wards savages 
of Man, Duty to- 
wards younger 
souls 367 

of Man, Emphasis 

on, in the T.S. 
367 

of Man, How to 

hasten realisation 
of 366 


of Man, 


366 
367 


367 


of Man in the T. S., 
Principle of 357 
of Man is a fact in 
Nature 357 
of Man, Realisation 
of 358—359, 366 
of Man, Recogni- 


tion of 357 

The ideal of 359 
Brotherhood, The Great 
White 10, 257, 


38+, 405, 462, 465 
Consciousness of 468 
Gifts of powers by, 

to Initiates 478 
Grades in 382 
Initiations of Mem- 

bers in 382-—383 
Object of cxistence 

of 375, 383 
stimulates spiritual 

growth of hu- 

manity 420 
There is only one 477 
What is 375—383 

Brownies 267 

Browning believed in 
Reincarnation 148 

Buchner, Ludwig, quot- 
d 


e 
Buddha, Dhydani 
Initiation 
Lord Gautama, see 
Gautama Buddha 
Lord Kasyapa 
Pratyeka 


130 
390 
383 


386 
382, 386 


496 THEOSOPHY 
PAGE 
Buddhahood, Attain- 
ment of 389 


Buddhas, Seven, in suc- 

cession in a world- 
riod 386 
Buddhi 99, 100, 122, 475 
What is 69, 1o0o—ro1 

Buddhic body, What is 
102—103 
consciousness 259, 484 
experience 472 

plane 62, 69, Ior, 
471, 484 

Bulwar taught Reincar- 


nation 148 
Burial, Cremation pre- 
ferable to 94, 232—234 


CALVINIST School, The 156 


Candlemas Day 475 
Carbohydrates 24, 37 
Carelessness, Karma of 212 
Causal body, The 7o, 102, 
103, 464 
and undesirable 
qualities 80 
Developed at Third 
Initiation 474 
How formed 332—333 
Matter of 69, 79 


Meaning of colours 

in So 
Method of growth 

of 81 
Nucleus within 164 
of a Master 80, 81, 423 
of anadvanced man 81 
of a pupil 80, 462 
of a savage 81 
of Lord Gautama 

Buddha 81 


EXPLAINED 
PAGE 
Causal body, The 
Same for alllives 126 
Shape of 79 
Size of 79 
Use of 78, 79 
vanishes at First 
Initiation 471—472 
What is 78—79 
Why so called 78—79 
Celibacy 39-—40 
Central ideas of reli- 
gions II—I15 
Centre of his circle 438 
Ceremonial, Christian 410 
magic 412 
magic, Ray of 329, 
330, 412 
Ceremonies, Outer 480 


Ceremony of First Initi- 
ation 469, 451 
of Second Initiation 481 
Chain, Incarnation of a 
338, 339, 340, 341 


Lunar 340 
of globes, Meaning 

of 335—341 

-period 341, 380 
Chakshusha Manu, The 

Lord 

Appearance of 399 

— 400 

Dress of 400 
Nationality of His 

body 399 

Work of 399 
Character, Built by 


thought 186—187, 282 
Delineation of 206 
Explained by Ke- 

incarnation 
How formed 


137 
129, 189 


497 


INDEX 

PAGE PAGE 

Character Christ, The 
How to modify 224 -body 103 

is not transmissible 141 see also Buddhic 

Not imposed on body 
man by God 133 -Child 297, 473 
Progress of, ex- Crucified 484 
plained 142 Death of the body of 395 
Charity, Result of 202 Disciples of 477 
Cheerfulness 454 Life-note of 14 
Chemical elements, How Life of 472 
formed 59, 63 -Life, What is 478 


Chhaya Sharira, Why so 
called 92 
see also etheric double 

Children of the Fire- 
mist 384 

Chochmah 55 

Chohan Initiation 329, 382 

What is a 382 
Christ, Church of 150 
The Pagan 409 
Christ, The, referred to 390 
quoted 152, 154, 
155, 195, 280, 
358, 432, 435, 471 
accepted Reincarna- 
tion 
and Jesus, Duality 
of 394 
and the Atonement 
197—198 
and the Passion 483, 484 
Ascension of 466, 
473, 477, 485 


147 


at the Feast of 
Pentecost 477 
Baptism of 473 
Belief in 258 
Birth of 473, 479 
Birth of, in man 


297, 258, 259 
68 


Lord Maitreya as 


394—395 
occupied body of 
Jesus 394, 395, 


399, 409, 417 
on Forgiveness of 
sins 195 
on Reincarnation 
152, 153, 154, 155 
Presentation of, in 


the Temple 475 
Presented to His 
Father 475, 476 
principle, Awaken- 
ing of 299 
principle, Develop- 
ment of 258 


principle, What is 257 
represents Buddhic 


principle 471 
Saviour of the 
World 258 


Second Advent of 368 
see also World- 
Teacher, Coming 


’e) 
The First-born 
Brother 
The Man of Sorrow 


486 


2 | PAGE 
Christ, The 

Thought vibrations 

of devotion to 
Transfiguration of 
466, 473, 474— 
476, 482— 484 
Christianity, Founder of 14 


285 


Key-notes of 13—14 
Modern, and Re- 
incarnation 159—160 
Official, and Re- 
incarnation 160 
Reincarnation in 149 
—159 
Christian Scripture, re- 
ferred to 194 
quoted 184, 257 


Chrysostom, avegctarian 35 
Churches of Asia, The 


Seven 155 
Church of Christ 150 
Roman Catholic 160 
‘ Circle of Generation’ 259 
Clement of Alexandria, 
referred to 35, 155 
quoted 426 
Cleverness, Cause of 187 
Coleridge believed in 
Reincarnation 148 
Collins believed in Rein- 
carnation 148 
Collins, Mabel 409 
Comasonry 412 
Communion of Saints 464 
Concentration, Hin- 
drance to 72 


Condemnation, Atonian 246 
Confidence (Shraddhi) 455 
Confucius 393 
Conscience, Evolution of 131 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Conscience 
Formed by past ex- 
perience 127, 129, 189 
How built 189 
Problems of, ex- 
plained by Rein- 
carnation 
What is 128 
Consciousness, Astral 482 
Attainment of Bud- 
dhic 259 
Body- = 71, 72, 76, 91 
Brain-, during sleep 
108—109 
Expansion of, at 
Initiation 437, 478 
“7”. 89, 91 
Individual 35 
Kamic 84 
of bodies 71 
of Buddhic plane 
259, 484 
of cells 89 
of Masters 481 
of the Great White 
Brotherhood 468 
Physical 89 
Self-, of cells 9o 
Stages of unfolding 
human 342—343 
Constitution of Man 68—121 
Control of thought 115, 


144 


444, 453 
of thought, How to 
acquire 302—303 
Self- 429, 448, 453 
Conversion 17, 464 
Cosmic Logos _52, 53, 54 
Council of Constanti- 


nople, The Second = 199 


INDEX - 499° 

PAGE PAGE 

Cox’s (Rev. S.) Salvator Darwinian evolution 145 
Mundi on hell 245 theory 323 


Creation, Object of 56—57 
Principle of sud- 
den 142 
Theory of special 
132—134, 143 
Cremation and etheric 


double 234 
preferable to burial 

94, 232—234 

Criminal 142 

What he is 144 

Criticism, Destructive 437 

Higher 437 

Karma of 183 
Crookes, Sir William, 

quoted 21 

and protyle 64 
Crucifixion, The 466, 


473, 476 —477, 484 
Cruelty called ‘Sport’ 168 


Crime of 167 

Results of 167, 214 

Sin against love 456 

to animals 31 
Curiosity, Hindrance to 

discipleship 437 


Cuvier, Prof. B., quoted 29 


DAMA (Control in act 
and speech) 454 

Damnation, Eternal 246, 248 

Darkness of ignorance 229 


Spiritual 194 
Darwin, Charles, re- 
ferred to 310 
quoted 29 
Evolutionary 


teaching of 137142 


Davids, Rhys, referred to 148 
Day of Judgment, The 
246, 256, 465 
Dead, Helping the 419, 435 
man and_ etheric 
double 239 
man clinging to 
etheric double 239 
man, Friends of the 
240, 241 
man in heaven wait- 
ing for and watch- 
ing his friends 275 
Prayers for the262— 264 
Death, Advantage of 
knowledge of 
condition after 228 
—229, 239 
and desire-elemen- 
tal 235 
Animal after 324—326 
Astral (or second) 
230, 242, 261, 269 
at old age, Advan- 


tage of 251, 266 
Attitude of mind 

after 260 
Change in a man 

after 241 


Condition of a 
drunkard after 
247 —< 
Condition of a mur- 
derer after 248, < 
Condition of a 
savageatter 252—~253 
Condition of a 
sensualist after 
247—248 


500 


PAGE 


Death, ,Condition of a 
suicide after 
250—294 
Condition of man of 
unselfish action 
after 250 
Condition of man of 
worldly ambition 


after 248—249 
Condition after, of 
man who. dies 


by accident 250— 
251, 253—254 
Condition of man 
with some rational 
interests after 
247, 249—250 
Condition of ordi- 
nary man after 
238—242, 247, 249 
Condition of very 
bad man. after 


247— 249 

Etheric double at 
94, 231 

Grief of mourners 
after 261—262 

Last thought before 
266—267 


Life after, What is 242 
Meeting loved ones 
265 


after 

of a babe 133, 135, 
145—146 

body, 


of physical 
What ts Yo—91 
Plant after 324—326 
Prana at 231 
Rearrangement of 
astral body after 
235—238, 240, 243 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Death, Review of past 
life after 126 
Review of past lifeat 230 

Second or astral 
230, 242, 261, 269 

-Struggles, What are 


231—232 
Sudden, Why injuri- 
ous 265—267 


Time and manner 
of, according to 
karma 221—222 
Time of unconsci- 
ousness after 265 
Two factors of exis- 
tence after 265 
What is 229—230 
What is astral life 
after 242 
Debt, Karmic 219, 220, 227 
‘ Deficiency diseases’ 25 
Depression 453, 461 
Colour of, in astral 
body 
delays pupil’s 
progress 448 
Helping a man in 306 
in meditation 445 
Desire-clemental 
228, 316, 447 
-elemental at death 235 


-elemental, High 
type of 237 
-elemental, Instinct 
of 
-elemental, Occlu- 
sion by the 238 
-elemental, Rear- 


rangement of 
astral body by the 
235—238 


5or 


INDEX 
PAGE PAGE 
Desire Deva 54, 267, 269, 385 
-elemental, ‘ Shell- evolution 381 
ing ” by the 238 Devachan 175, 263, 272 
-elemental, Thral- Man in 269-—272 
dom of the 237 What ts 102 
-elemental, What is Why so named 63 
71—75 Devarajas, The Four 
Extirpation of 351 Great 385 
—354 Devotion, Colour for, in 
for wealth 188 astral body 85 


is the cord to bind 
action and_ its 
fruits 226 

makes opportunities 


186, 187—188 


Use of 174 
What is 187 
Desirelessness (Vai- 
rigya) 452—453 
Test of 453 
Destiny and God 190—191 
Even good, is a 
bond 226 
Explained by Law 
of Karma 181—184 
First thread of the 
cord of 186 
How to modify 
224— 225 
Human, Three 


explanations for 181 
Result of chance 181 
Second thread of the 

cord of 186, 187,224 
Slaves of 198 
Third thread of the 

cord of 186, 188—190 
Three threads of the 

cord of 186, 295, 224 
What is 209 
Will of God 181 


Colour for, in mental 


body 82 
Ray of 329, 330, 

410, 412 

to God 55 


Devotional Ray 329 
Ray, Dominance of 330 
Ray, Head of 410 
Ray, Influence of 412 

Dharma of the Brah- 


mana 345 

of the Kshattriya 344 

of the Shudra 343 

of the Vaishya 344 
What is 343—344 
Dharmakiya Vesture 381 


Dhruva, The Master, 
Pupil of Lord 
Maitreya 407 

Teacher of Master 
K. H. 407 
Dhyan Chohans 34 
Dhyant Buddha 390 


Diogenes, a vegetarian 34 
Laértius 

Disciple, Inner life of a 479 
Training ground for 


life of a 430 
Discipleship, Bigness 
necessary for 438 


502 


PAGE 
Discipleship 
Earnestness neces- 
sary for 
First steps on the 
Path of 431—432 
Hindrances to 436— 439 
Qualifications for 441 
Requirements from 
aspirant for 
Discipline of life, What 
1S 441—443 
Discrimination (Viveka) 452 
Diseases, Cause of con- 
genital 
Dislikes, Karma of 
Divine Architect 
Justice 143, 


445 


442 


204 

183 

55, 379 
144, 

156, 157 

Law 191, 194, 217 
Life 20, 56, 61, 69, 
205, 206, 312, 315, 
321, 328, 333, 334, 
338, 341, 349, 359, 

368 
Love 57, 145, 219, 

264, 348 

Mind 190, 191, 272 
Plan 191, 259, 299, 

379, 380, 383, 441 


Plane 61 
Self 56 
Will 14, #15, 188, 
190, 194, 195, 
204, 206, 376, 384 
Wisdom 18 
Djwal Kul (D. K.), The 
Master 
Appearance of 
413—414 
as Aryasanga 413 
as Kleinias 413 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Djwal Kul, The Master 
House (Cabin) of 
407, 414 
Master of 414 
Nationality of His 
bod 414 


y 
Walking with 


Master K. H. 407 
Doubt, Fetter of 480 
Dream, Vivid 97 


Dreams, Causes for ter- 
rible fear during 116 
Confused 114 

Factors in its pro- 


duction I112—113 
Feeling of reverence 
during 116 
How to remember 
114—118 
Kinds of 113—114 
Mechanism for 
104—106 


Peculiarities of 
physical mechan- 


ism in 105 
Prophetic 113 
Real, What are 113 


Remembered by 
savages 
Symbolical 
True Vision in 
113, 116 
Vivid and connect- 
ed 114 
What are and how 
caused 103—114 
Drink, How to cure 
another of the habit 
of 304—305 
Druses, The 410 
Dudley, Sir Robert 411 


110 
114 


INDEX 503 

PAGE PAGE 
Duty, Key-note of, in Effect of thought on 
Hinduism 12 mental body 

towards elders 281—282 
366—367 of thought-vibra- 

towards elemental tions of hatred 285 
essence 370 of undesirable 

towards equals 367 emotions 450 
towards savages 367 of worry on astral 

towards younger body 286 
souls 367 of worry on mental 

Dying and going to bod 449 


sleep, compared 231 
Helping the 264 
Process of 230—231 


EARTH planet 54, 339, 386 
planet, How formed 60 
planet, Incarnation 

of 340 
planet is composed 
of seven worlds 60 
Edison, a vegetarian 35 
Effect of alcoholic 
drinks 39, 442 
of argumentative- 
ness on mental 
body 449 
of fussiness 449 
of good intentions 167 
of inane giggling on 
astral body 449 
of irritability 286, 
437, 447 
of narcoticdrugs 
39, 442 
of past thinking 189 
of thought on 


astral body 282 
of thought on causal 
body 282 


4 
on pupil lending his 
body to Master 
Efficiency 
hastens spiritual 
progress 
Ego, The 71, 82, 92, 
122, 332, 333, 334, 
385, 474 
and encumbrance of 
family duties 
200—201 
168 


417 
458 


448 


and parents 

and permanent 
atoms 

and sleep of physi- 
cal body 

and suitable physi- 
cal body 

and task of uncon- 
genial nature 

and vicious appe- 
tites 172—173 

becomes as end 
of afunnel from 
Monad at Initia- 


164 
108 


168 


200 


tion 471 
Character of 80 
Condition of, in 

sleep Il0O—I12 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Ego, The, Conditions for 


final liberation of 
174—175, 219 

Control of, over his 
instruments 107 
Descent of 332 
Development of 77 
Formation of 332—333 


Functions of 70 
Aabitat of 276 
has no sex 170 


Higher powers of, 
during sleep 
ITI—112 
His link of at- 
tachment to an 
animal 172 
How guided to en- 
vironments of 
nation and family 


199—z2o1 
How he creates new 
Karma 207—z208 


How his progress is _: 
seen 84 
Instantaneous dra- 
matisation by, 
during sleep 111 
Instruments of 106 
is a developing en- 
tity 106 
is initiated, not the 
body 469 
Linked to Monad 470 
Memory of = 125, 129 
of a babe dying 
young 145 
of a Master taking 
a new body 416 
of a savage in sleep 110 
of pupil 462 


PAGE 


Ego, The, 


of the child 131 
Outer garment of 230 
Peculiarities of,” 
during sleep 111—112 
Personality becomes 
a reflex of 470 
Prevision by, during 
slee 112 
Qualities built into 
81, 282 
Real life of 123 
Recognition of old 
friends by 128 
Record of progress 
of 121 
Representations of 275 
reviews past life at 
death 230 
Separating himself 
from physical 
body 230—231 
States of conscious- 
ness of 113 
stores all memories 
of the past 129 
Symbolical image 
by, during sleep 112 
Taking a new baby 
body 415—416 
Thought-form vivi- 
fied by 265, 274 
Union of, with 
Monad 469 
Union of, with per- 
sonality 465, 467 
What draws him to 
reincarnation 174 
What is 69-—71, 100 
Withdrawing after 
death 260 


505 


INDEX 

PAGE PAGE 

The, Elizabeth, Queen of 
PB ork of, inaccurate England 411 
perception of ob- Elves 267 

jects 107 Emerson believed in Re- 

Egos are associated in incarnation I 

groups 179 Endurance (Tittksh@) 
Hatred between 162 434—455 

Link between 162 Energy, How to avoid 
Love between 162 waste of 300—3or 
Number of human 134 How to conserve 287 


Relation between 161 
Relationship __ be- 

tween 162 

Egyptian mummy 234 


religion, Symbology 
of 388 


Electrons 64 
Elemental, Artificial 263, 
267, 415, 416 
Artificial, What is 289 
Astral 71—75, 316, 447 
Desire-, or astral 
71—75, 228, 235 
—238, 316, 447 
72, 289, 
292, 420 
Duty to- 
370 
288 


essence 


essence, 
wards 
essence, What is 
group-soul 332 
kingdoms 316 
Mental 71—75, 316, 447 

Physical 71, 76—77, 
89, 91 
115, 377 
289 


Elementals 
What are 

Elijah, referred to 147, 
151, 152 

and S. John the 

Baptist, compared 
153 

64 


Environments given by 
actions 186, 188—190 
How to change 229 
Esau 156, 157 
Essence, Astral elemen- 
tal 75, 267, 289, 
292, 316 
Elemental 72, 75, 
267, 289, 292, 316, 
370, 420 
Monadic 72, 174, 315 
Eternal damnation 246, 
248 
245 
232 


punishment 
Etherial wraiths 
Etheric brain during 
sleep 109, 113 
corpse and black 
magic 234 
corpse galvanised 234 
double 89, 95, 99, 
1o/7, 165, 166, 
189, 230 
double after death 232 
double, Appearance 


of 91 
double and crema- 

tion 234 
double and dead 

man 239 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Etheric 


double and physical 
body, Relation 
between 93—94, 96 
double at death 94, 231 
double, Cause of 
beautiful 93 
double, Cause of 
defective 
double, Colour of 
92, 231 
double, Effect of 
anesthetics on 93 
double, Effect of 


chloroform on 93 
double, Fate of, 
after death 232 


double, Function of 92 
double, Matter of 91, 92 
double, Shape of 92 
double, Size of 92 
double, Vortices in 94 
double, What is 91—-93 


Mould 199 
Evil, Origin and use of 

346— 350 

Origin of 346—348 

Use of 348—350 
Evolution, Compression 

of 479 

Darwinian 145 

Deva 381 


for man, Law of 14, 361 
for the brute, Law 
of 14, 361 
How to forward 
our, by thought 
295—296 
Human,see Human 
evolution 
Idea of, in religions 335 


PAGE 


Evolution 


Illustration of its 
process in Occult 
Museum 405 

is God’s Plan 203, 

299—300, 383 

is God’s Will 161, 204 

Law of _ 132, 160, 

161, 174, 311, 312 
Motive power of 


313, 319 
of animals 23 
of conscience 131 
of form 142 


of human qualities 139 

of Life 142, 310— 
313, 319——321 

of Life, Meaning of 
310—313 

of Life, Purpose of 
319—321 

of social and moral 
qualities 138 

of the Initiate, 
Planes for 463 

People in different 
stages of 8 
Plan of 384, 425 
Proof of 311—312 

Reason for rapid 

progress in, at 
present 468 

Scheme of,—Its 
meaning 338—341 


Evolutionary teaching of 


Darwin 137—142 
teaching of Weiss- 
mann 137—142 


Exertion and Destiny 21! 


and Karma _—_198, 199 


507 


INDEX 
PAGE PAGE 
Experience is transmut- Flesh diet 
i 137 causes disease 26 
ed into faculties crmersece eapral bolle: 34 
Facu.ty, How formed coarsens physical 
137, 189 34, 442 
Innate, Whatis 128 coarsens the man 22 
Fairies 267, 370 increases animal 
Faith 455 passion 3x 
Blind 17 Inferior to vege- 
Fatalism, Whether tarian diet 23—3r1 
Karma is a doctrine of under medical 
198 orders 38—39 
Fate, see Destiny. unnatural 30 
can bechanged 218 unnecessary 30 
Fear, Colour of, in astral unwholesome 31 
body Fohat 470, 471 
Fell Policy, Dr. 163 Four Noble Truths, The 
Fetter rst (Delusion of 389 
self) 479—480 Franklin, Benjamin, a 
2nd (Doubt) 480 vegetarian 
3rd (Superstition) Freemasonry 411, 412, 464 


480—481 
4th (Attachment to 
the enjoyment of 


sensation) 483 
Sth (Anger. or 

hatred) 483—484 
6th (Desire for 


beauty of form) 485 


7th (Desire for form- 
less life) 485 
8th (Pride) 485 
Sth (Irritability) 485 
roth (Ignorance) 485 


Fetters, The Ten 479, 485 
The Ten, Time 

; taken to cast off 485 
Fichte taught Reincar- 


nation 148 
Findlater, Dr. 148 
Fisher, Prof. I. 29 


Free-will 211 
Actions by 208 
and astrology 206—207 
and karma 209—210 
and necessity 

204—206, 225 

French Revolution, The 

359, 412 
Effect of 
449—45o0 


Fussiness, 


GAMGEE, Prof., quoted 26 

Gandharvas 276 
Gautama Buddha, The 
Lord, referred to 

13, 132, 386—393, 394 

quoted 42, 280, 435 

Appearance of 
39r—392 


308 


PAGE 


Gautama Buddha, Lord 
appears at the 
Vaishakh _ cere- 


mony 391, 392 
_as Bodhisattva 386 
as Hermes 12, 388 
as Orpheus 12, 389 
as Prince Sid- 
dhartha 389 
as Tehuti or Thoth 
12, 388 
as Vyasa 388 
as Zoroaster 12, 
388, 417 
Assistant of 378, 387 
Aura of 392, 397 
a vegetarian 35 


became Head of 
the Second Ray 
386 
blesses the world 
once a year 391 
Causal body of 81 
had borrowed 
a body as the 
Buddha 
had borrowed a 
body as Zoroaster 
417 
handed over office 
of World-Teacher 
389 
Head of the Second 
Ray 329, 378, 386 
Head of the Teach- 
ing Department 378 
How He became the 
World-Teacher 387 
Manifestation of 
Wisdom Aspect 
of the Logos 


417 


376 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Gautama Buddha, Lord 
Reflection of 393 
remembered His 
incarnation as a 
tiger 173—174 
Representative of 
377, 378, 387 


Shadow of 393 
Successor of 391 
taught Reincar- 
nation 147 
Two supplementary 
acts by 390—39r1 
Work of, in Aryan 
root-race 388—389 
Genius and Law of 
Heredity 132 
Explained by Rein- 
carnation 
140—-142, 144 
Found along two 
lines 141 
How built 140—142, 
187 
is sterile 140 
Musical 141 
of art 141, 418 
of intellect 141 
of virtue 141 
Political 418 
Gethsemane, Garden of 
473, 484 
Giggling, Effect of inane, 
on astral body 449 


Glanville’s (Rev.) Lux 
Orsentalis 160 
Gnomes 370 
Gnostics, The 147, 155, 394 
God and Destiny 190—191 
and the solar oe: 


509 


INDEX 
PAGE PAGE 
God Group-soul 
Anthropomorp hic, Number of bodies 
Reasons for non- foreach 326—327 
belief in 49—5o What is a 324——-326 
Belief in 49—5o Guru and Chelas of 
Devotion to 55 ancient days in India 
His Plan is Evolu- 424, 450 
tion 203, 


299—300, 383 
Immanence of 3, 8, 


11, 368 
Proof of His exis- 
tence 55—56 
Theosophical con- 
ceptionof | 50—51 


Three Aspects of 53 
What is meant by 


52—53 

Will of 181 
Goethe on Reincarnation 

148 

Good and evil 347—348 


Gospel, The, referred to 
160, 483 
quoted 195, 207 

Gosse believed in Rein- 
carnation 148 
Gossip, Sin against love 456 

Wickedness of 

303—304 
Gotrabhu 456 
Greek Orphic System 51 

Group of Guides 377, 
380, 399 
377 
377, 379 


of Rulers 
of Teachers 
Group-soul 223, 
324—326, 327, 
328, 330, 331, 
332, 333, 334, 470 
Breaking up of a = 327 


Hasit of thought, How 
created 186—187 
Habits, Cause of bodily 105 

Tricks of, How 
transmitted 131 
Heckel, quoted 28 

Haig, Dr. Alexander, 
quoted 26, 28, 30 

Ais Uric Acid in 

the Causation of 
Disease 27, 30 
Hamsa 482 

Happiness, Outward, 
How gained 189 
Outward, is due to 

action 

Hatred between egos 
Colour for, in astral 
body 85 
Fetter of 483—484 
How to kill out 224 

Karmic relationship 
of 220—22I1 

Heaven, Dead man in, 

waiting for his 
friend 275 

Dead man in, watch- 


203 
162 


ing his friend 275 
Higher, Manin 277 
Higher, Stay in 278 


Intensity of bliss in 
272—273 


Joys of 272 


510 
PAGE 
Heaven 
Kinds of 272-—273 
-life, Character of 273 
-life, Length of 273 
Man in 269—272 
Material 244 
No eternal 247 
of an artist 273 
of a slum-child 273 
What is 245, 269 
Heavenly Man, The 380 
Heaven-world, The 230 


Average period for 
persons in 
176—179, 277 
Babies in 274 
Children in 273—274 
Condition of a man 
in 271 
Deity in 275 
Dominant charac- 
teristics of its sub- 


divisions 277 
Enjoyment in 271 
Entering 269 
Friends in 274—275 


How to draw upon 

the wealthof 
270——~271 

Opportunities for 
progress in 275—276 

Seven subdivisions 
of 276 

Windows in 27o, 
271, 278 

Hebrew religion, Key- 
note of 13 

Hell 158, 194, 237, 
241, 247, 271 
-fire theory 241 
Lower 158 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Hell 
Mythical 256 
Non-existence of 

245—246, 254 

Helper, Astral 241, 262, 

307, 436 


Astral, Qualifica- 
tions for 264—265 
Helping a man in depres- 
sion 306 
by prayers 305—306 
others during our 
sleep 306—308 
the dead 419 
the dying 264 
the newly dead 435 
Herder taught Reincar- 
nation 148 
Heredity, Cause of bad 204 
Law of 130—132, 
141, 143 
Law of, and moral 
genius 132 
Law of, and musical 
instinct 132 
Physical 127, 141, 166 


Problems of 141 
Violations of the 

Law of 131 

Hermes of Praxiteles 409 

Trismegistes 388 
Trismegistes, Teach- 

ing of 12 

Higher heaven 277-278 
Self, Development 

of 474 

Self, What is 71 

Triad 99, 100 

Hilarion, The Master 409 


Appearance of 409 
as lamblichus 


512 


INDEX 
PAGE PAGE 
ilarion, The Master Human 
soa Light on the evolution, Three 
Path 409 critical points in 464 
gave The Voice of Spirit 488 
the Silence 409 Humanity, Brotherhood 


Head of Fifth Ray 409 
Nationality of His 


body 40 
Residence of 409 
Work of 409 


Hinduism, Key-note of 12 
Holiness, Path of 380, 
456, 466, 478, 480, 486 
Holy Ghost, The 53, 156 
376, 475 
Ghost, Baptism of 
the 474 


Grail, The 333, 334 
Spirit, The 35, 318 
Spirit, Descent of 
the 466, 473, 485 
Spirit, Festival of 
the 477 
206 


430 


Horoscope 
Householder, Lessons to 
be learnt by a 
Spiritual life for a 
429-—432 
Human artificial 267 
consciousness, Stage 
of unfolding 342—343 


nee 181 
evolution 4, 69 
evolution, Method 

of 334—335 
evolution, Planes 

for 463 
evolution, Purpose 

of 164 
evolution, Steps for 

orderly 343—345 


of, see Brotherhood 
of Man 

Hume, quoted 

Humility 

Hungarian Adept, The, 
see Rakoczi, The 
Master 

Huxley, quoted 14 

Hydrocarbons 24 

Hypatia, a vegetarian 34 


148 
458 


ITAMBLICHUS, 
tarian 34 
Master Hilarion as 409 
Ignorance, Darkness of rt 


a vege- 


Fetter of 

is the cause of 
bondage 206 

is the root of all 
miseries 42, 422 


Illumination, Stage of, 
in Christian Church 
426, 466 
Image, Living 405, 450, 461 
Living, What is 460 
Perceptual 108 
Symbolical, during 
sleep 
Immanence of God 3, 8, 
1x, 368 
Imperfection, What is 346 
Incarnation into animal 
form 150, 171—173 
of a chain 338, 339, 
340, 34x 


IIz 


3x2 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Indian Scripture, quoted 
186 


Shastras, quoted 222 
Individualisation 84, 121, 
172, 175, 324, 
338, 464 
Method of 330—333 
Modes of 175 
Right ways of 175 
Wrong ways of 
175—176 
Individualism, Key-note 
of, in Christianity 13 
Individuality 71 
and personality, 
Relation between 71 
What is 69 
Inequality in Nations 361 
in people, Reason of 
361 
Initiate and the Ten 
Fetters 479 
Gifts of powers to 
the, by the Great 
Brotherhood 478 
Life of the 478—486 
Planes for his evolu- 
tion 463 
Pupil-, presented 
to the King after 
Third Initiation 475 
Requirements from 
the, before pass- 
ing on 478 
Work of the 478—486 
Initiates are unequal in 
development 467 
will be useful to the 
World-Teacher 
when Hecomes 469 
Initiation 372, 376, 382, 447 


PAGE 


Initiation 


and age of physical 
body 469 
Buddha 383 
Ceremony of 464 
Chohan 329, 382 
Egos in young 
bodies initiated 468 
Expansion of con- 
sciousness at 473, 478 
Fifth Great 477, 
478, 483, 485—486 
First Great 257, 358, 
463, 464, 467, 
469—472, 478, 
479—481 
First Great, Ac- 
count of a 469—47o 
First Great, Causal 
body vanishes at 
471—472 
First Great, Cere- 
mony of 469 
First Great, Cere- 
mony of, held on 
astral plane 481 
First Great, Given 
by 464 
First Great, Higher 
and lower self be- 
come one at 474 
First Great, Lord 
Maitreya as Initi- 
ator at 469 
First Great, Soul 
dominates _feel- 
ings at 472 
First Great, The 
Lord Vaivasvata 
Manu at 470 


INDEX 513 


PAGE 


Initiation 


First Great, The 
Mahachohan at 470 
Fourth Great 476— 
477, 478, 482, 483, 
484—485 
Fourth Great, 
among the Egyp- 
tians 477 
Fourth Great, 
Double aspect of 476 
Fourth Great, Suf- 


fering at the stage 
of 476 
Given by 464 
Hall of 469 
Importance of 464 

Level of progress 
for 467—468 

Mahachohan 377, 
382, 383 


No reduction in 
standard of re- 
quirements for 468 


Object of 463 
of the Lord of the 
World 382 
of the Master 473 
of the Pratyeka 
Buddha 382 
of the Silent 
Watcher 382 
Physical health 
necessary for 468 
Portal of 469 


Qualifications for 
fitness for 466—467 
Second Great 468, 
478, 481—482 
65 


PAGE 
Initiation 
Second Great, Cere- 
mony of, held on 
mental plane 481 
Second Great, Evi- 
dence of proper 
use of powers 
before 481 
Second Great, Lord 
Maitreya as Initi- 
ator at 481 
Second Great, Lord 
Vaivasvata Manu 
at 481 
Second Great, 
Mental body 
quickened at 474 
Second Great, Soul 
dominates mind 
at 472 
Star of 384 
‘Strait Gate’ of 456 
Third Great, 474— 
476, 478, 482—484 
Third Great, Causal 
body developed 
at 474 
Third Great, con- 
ferred by the King 
Himself 475 
Third Great, Pupil 
Initiate presented 
to the King after 475 
Third Great, Pupil 
of the King de- 
puted to confer 


Vow of wy 
What ts 463—465 
Initiations 429 


among Christian 
doctrines 472—478 


S14 PRROSOPHY EXPLAINED 


| PAGE 
Py is tous 
Intervals between 467 
-- - Tbe Ten 382 
-Initiator, Hierophant- 
- 69, 470, 473, are 
3 : I 


‘Lord Maitreya as 
|. the 469—47o, 481 
| Master K. H. as the 469 
Master M.asthe 469 

The One 384, 390, 
| 469, 474 
Injury, Karma of 183 
Instinct, Moral, What : 

12 


is 
Musical, and Here- 
dity 132 
Instincts, What are 127, 326 
International Exhibition, 
The first great, in 1851 


PAGE 


Interval between lives 


savages of mild 
ype 178 
for shop-keepers 177 

for the lower middle 
ass 177 

for the mass of un- 
Skilled labour 178 

for the working class 
(Skilled labour) 177 

for those approach- 
ing the Path 176 


Intuition 69, 101, 473 
Spirit of 482 
Intuitional plane 69 
see Buddhic plane 
Irritability 74, 80, 457 
Colour for, in astral 
body 


Colour for, in 


404 mental body 82 
Interval between lives Cure another of the 
175—179 habit of | 304—305 
Factors for 175 Effect of, lasts for 
for a child 178 48 hours 437, 447 
for an ego dying Effect of, on astral 
young 178 body 286 
for city-merchants 177 Fetter of 485 
for country-gentle- Hindrance to Dis- 
men 177 cipleship 437 
for farmers 177 Hindrance to pro- 
for habitual crimi- gress of pupil 447 
nals 178 How to get rid of 
for Initiated Disci- 298—299, 447 
ples 176 Repression of 459 
for professional] Ways of dealing 
men 177 with 447 
for savages of brutal! 
type 178 JACOB 156, 157 
for savages of high Jatelnd: Din Rumi, 
type 178 quoted 147 


INDEX 
PAGE PAGE 
mes, S.,a vegetarian 35 Jivatma, The 163, 205 
Ja I, King NP England nana Yoga 440 
411,412 John, S., quoted 395 
the Less, a vegeta- the Baptist, S. 147, 
rian 35 ce Hees eae 156 
lousy, Colour for, in the aptist an 
Val ade Elijah, compared 153 
eremiah 150 Josephus’s De Bello 
see and Reincarna- Judaico, quoted 51 
tion 150 Joyousness 449 
His Letter to Avitus 157 Judgment, The Day of 
Jesus, The Master 132, 246, 256, 465 
409—410, 482 Jupiter men 329 
Appearance of 410 planet _ 34 
as Apollonius of planet, Incarnation 
Tyana 409 O 
as Ramanujacharya 410 The Master, see 
Baptism of 395, 409 Agastya, Rishi 
Body of, taken by Justice, Divine 143, 144, 
the Christ 394, 156, 157 
395, 399, 409, 417 
Disciples of 424 Kabala, The, Reincarn- 
Dress of 410 ation in 147 
Duality of, and the Kama 99, tor, 268 
Christ 394 Kama-Manas 100, ror, 288 
has Christian reli- Kamaraga, Fetter of 483 
gion as His special Kama rupa 99 
charge 410 See also astral 
Head of Sixth Ray 410 body 
Key-note of His Kamic aura 120 
Presence 410 consciousness 84 
Master of devotees 410 elements 171, 172 
Nationality of His Karma 180—227 
body 410 Accumulated, of 
Residence of 410 service 463 
Work of 410 among animals 
Jewish Alexandrian 222—223 
School, The 132 and exertion 198, 199 
Jews, Reincarnation and failure in busi- 


among 149—152, 154 
Jivanmukta, The 6 


- $15. 


ness of good men 
217—218 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Karma and fatalism 198 


and free-will 209—210 
and opportunity 199 
and prosperity 217 
and sufferings of 
holy people 218 
and time and man- 
ner of death 


221I—222 
and viciousness 216 
Arrears of 476 


Beginning of 185—186 
Beginning of, for a 
particular creature 
185 
Binding element in 226 
Burnt up by know- 
ledge 22/ 
Collective 220 
has neither begin- 
ning nor ending 185 
How to exhaust past 
individual 225—227 
How to mould deli- 


berately 224—2295 
Human 185—186 
is a growing force 212 
is eternal 185 
is no punishment 

for sin 193 
is readjustment of 

harmony 193 
Kriyamana 208, 210 


Law of 122, 145, 
146, 161, 168, 
180, 181—184, 

192, 193, 194, 198 

Law of, and prayer 215 

Law of, Interfering 
with 212—214 


PAGE 


Karma, Law of, is a 


natural law 183 
Law of, is an invari- 

able law 184 
Law of, is educative 194 
Law of, Religious 


version of - 84 
Law of, Scientific 
statement of 184 


Law of, What is 
181—184, 193, 215 
Law of, Whether it 
eliminates God 
190—191 
Life- 218 
Lords of, The, see 
Lords of Karma 
No punishment in 


213, 215 
of accidents 219—220 
of a good life 203 


of agreeable futility 226 
of aspiration 183, 187 


of carelessness 212 
of criticism 183 
of cruelty 214 
of dislikes 183 
of injury 183 
of kind act 183 
of Nations 423 


of relieving suffer- 


ing 4 
of repeated thoughts 187 
of search for Truth 183 
of sudden death 220 


of sympathies 183 
of the animal 185 
of the mineral 185 
of the vegetable 189 
of truth 217 
of want of sympathy 194 


INDEX 517 

PAGE PAGE 
Karma of will for unsel- Key-note of Hebrew reli- 

fish service 187 gion 13 

Opportunities are of Hinduism r1—12 

earned by 447 of Muhammadanism 14 

Prarabdha 208, 212 of Roman religion 13 
Prarabdha, How to of Zoroastrianism 

escape effects of 12, 280 
210—211 Key-notes of religions 

Prarabdha, Three 9, rI—15 

classes of 210 ‘King, The’ 383—385, 393 

‘Ready-money’ 218 Aura of 384 
Reward of good = 217 Coming face to face 

Sanchita 208, 209, with 474—475 
210, 219, 220 Coming of, to our 

Sanchita, What is 208 earth 384 
Sufferings and past 218 confers Third Ini- 


Three kinds of 


208—209 
Tools of 213 
Transferability of 

197—198 
Yoga 431, 440 


Yoga—What is 
Karmic accounts, 
Settlement of 220 


429 


—221 

debt 219, 220, 227 

dues 226 

obligations 227 
relationship of love 

or hatred 220—221 

right 447 
Kasyapa Buddha, The 

Lord 386 
Kellogg, Dr. J. H., quot- 

ed 27 

Kepher 55 


Key-note of Buddhism 13 
of Christianity 13—14 
of Egyptian religion 12 
of Greek religion 12 


tiation Himself 475 
Pupils of 383, 386, 

390, 393, 475 
represents the Logos 


on our earth 384 
Work of 385 
Kleinias 413 
Knowledge is necessary 
for liberation 227 
is the remedy for all 
miseries 41—42 
Key-note of, in 
Buddhism 13 
What is real 47 
Koilon 57, 58 
Krishna, Shri, referred 
to 368, 390 
quoted 56, 191, 195 
Child- 394 
-cult 396 
Lord Maitreya as 
393394 
of the Gopis 394 


of the Mahabharata 
394 


te THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Krishna, Shri, Thought 

vibration of devotion 
to 285 
Kriyadshakti (Will-power)385 

Kumiras, “The Four” 
386, 414 

Kuthumi (K.H.) The 
Master 404—408 
quoted 42,77 
Accomplishments of 405 


Age of +o04—405 
Appearance of 404 
Arm-chair of 406 
as Initiator 469 
as Nagarjuna 404 


as Pythagoras 404 
as second son of 
King of Persia 417 
Assistant of Lord 
Maitreya 407 
Bodhisattva of sixth 
root-race 408 
Chohan of Second 
Ray 408 
Constant friend and 
companion of 


404—405 
Dress of 404 
Exercise of 407 
Family of 407 
Followers of 406 
Garden of 406 
Guardian of Occult 
Museum 405 
Horse of 407 
House of 403, 405— 
406, 414 


Influence noticeable 
i 408 


in 
Languages spoken 
by 405 


Lao-t 


LANKAy Sinking of 402 
Law, : 


~~. 


PAGE 


aster 

Lecturette by 406 
Living images of 

pupils of 405 
Master of Master 

Djwal Kul 414 
Nationality of His 

body 404 
One with the 

Bodhisattva 407 
Past lives of 404 
Real Founder of the 

T. S. 45, 47, 367, 403 
Riding with Master 

M. 407 
Sending benediction 


Servants of 407 
Successor of Lord 
Maitreya 407 
Teacher of 407 
took University 
Degree in Europe 405 


Kutichaka (Builder) 479 


393 
octrine of 12 
of Brotherhood 21, 364 
of Cause and Effect, 
see Law of Karma 
of Evolution 132, 
160, 161, 174, 


311, 312 
of evolution for 
man 14, 501 
of evolution for the 
brute 14, 301 


of Heredity, see 
Heredity 


519 


INDEX 
_ PAGE PAGE 
w of Karma, _ see Light on the Path, 
= Karma quoted 422—423 
of Karma and igno- given by Master 
rance I Hilarion 409 
of Love 167,193 Lipika, The 165 
of Sacrifice 197 Living image 405, 450, 461 
of Self-sacrifice 14, 361 image, What isa 460 
Laws of Nature and Logoi, Solar 53 
ignorance 198 The Seven Cosmic 
of Nature, What Planetary 52, 34 
are 190—191, The Seven Solar 
193, 228 Planetary 54 
Laziness delays spiritual The Three, of the 
progress 448 Solar System 53 
Leadbeater, Bishop Logos, Cosmic 52, 53, 54 
C.W., quoted 403 First 55, 318, 376 
met Master Rakoczi Manifested 52, 376 
413 Plan of the 378 
visited Rishi Agas- Second 55, 318, 376 
tya 403 Second, Descent of 
Lemurian (Fourth) root- the 475 
race 336, 337, 338, 383 Solar 52, 53, 54, 
Lessing taught Reincar- 375, 384 
nation 148 Staff Corps of the 38r 
Liberation 227, 372, 382, Third 55, 318, 376 


478 

Conditions _neces- 
sary for 175, 219 
Desire for 455—456 
How to attain 226 


Life, Divine, see Divine 
Life 
Evolution of, see 
Evolution of Life 
in a stone 
Light, Central teaching 
of I2 
Light of Asta, The, 
referred to 173, 389 
quoted 46, 184, 
190, 213 


Unmanifested 51, 380 
Lord of the World, The 
378, 383—385, 390 
see also ‘The King’ 


Appearance of 385 
Aspirant on the Path 
presented to 385 
Aura of 384 
Ceremony by 385 


Coming of, to our 


earth 384 
governs the First 
Ray 329 


Head of the Occult 


Hierarchy 377 


$20 


PAGE 


Lord of the World, The 
Head of the Ruling 
Department 377 
Initiation of 382 
is the One Initiator 
384 
Lieutenants of 377, 
384, 386 
Manifestation of the 
First Aspect of 
the Logos 
Our, is the third 
Holder of that 
Office 
Pupils of 383, 386, 
390, 393 
Representative of 377 
represents the Logos 
on our earth 384 
Work of 385 
Lords of Karma, The 
165, 204, 207, 208, 
209, 213, 214, 219, 250 
of Mercury 386 
of the Flame, The 
384, 390, 475 


376 


385 


Love at first sight 128 
between egos 162, 483 
Divine 57, 145, 219, 

264, 348 
Earthly 483 
Karmic relationship 
of 220—221 
Law of 167, 193 
Power of 458 
Qualification of 456 
Selfish human 452 
Sensual, How puri- 
fied 443 
Sins against 456 
Universal 481 


THEOSOPRY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 

Luck, Cause of 188, 189 
hat is 209 

Lunar Chain 340 


MADHAVACHARYA, Pupil 


of Lord Maitreya 397 
Meterlinck, quoted 424 
Magic, Black 234 

Ceremonial 412 


Ray of Ceremonial 
329, 330, 412 


Magnetic affinity 173 
shell 117 
thread 230 
tie 187, 231 

Magnetism, Phenomena 

of 120 

Mahabhinishkramana 387 

Mahiachohan Initiation 


377, 382, 383 

Mahachohan, The 377, 475 
Appearance of 399 

at First Initiation 470 


Aura of 399 
Dress of 399 
Head of Chohians of 
five Rays 399 
Head of the Group 
of Guides 399 
Initiation of 377, 
382, 383 
Keeper of the Re- 
cords 380, 462 


Manifestation of 
Third Aspect of a6 


the Logos 3 
Nationality of His 

body 399 
Office of 383 


Pupil presented to, 
ateach stage 462 


INDEX 


PAGE 


Mahachohan, The 

Pupil presented to, 
before Initiation 469 

Resemblance of 
Master Rakoczi 
to 413 

supervises five Rays 
from Third to 


Seventh 329 
Work of 380 
Mahadeva 318, 331 


Mahaparanirvanic plane 61 
Mahavira 393 
Maitreya, The Lord, 
referred to 387, 
393—399 
quoted 47, 396 
See also World- 
Teacher and 
Christ 
Appearance of 
as High Priest in 


397 


Atlantis 395 
as Initiator at First 
Initiation 469 


as Initiator at 
Second Initiation 481 
as Shri Krishna of 
the Gopis 393—394 
as Shri Krishna of 
the Mahabharata 394 
as the Christ 394—395 


Assistant of 407 
atthe Vaishakh 
ceremony 391 
Aura of 397—398 
Central feature of 
His teaching 395 
Coming of 368, 398 


66 


521 


PAGE 


Maitreya, The Lord, 
See also World- 
Teacher, Coming 
of 

First step of, as 
World-Teacher 393 

Garden of 398, 469, 
470, 481 

had borrowed body 

of Jesus 394, 395, 
399, 409, 417 
398, 401 
398 


House of 

How to think of 

Influence noticeable 
in 397, 408 


Marble seat of 470 
Mode of manifesta- 
tion of 398 
Nationality of His 
body 397 
occupied body of 
Tsong -ka-pa 396 
Pupils of i ad 


Representative of 
Lord Buddha 
377, 378, : 
Successor of Lord 


Gautama 391 
Teacher of Master 
Dhruva 407 
took birth as Shri 
Krishna 418 
took over the 
office of World- 
Teacher 389 


Unity between, and 
Master K. H. 407 

will borrow a body 
when He comes 415 


INDEX 


PAGE 


Master, The 


How He knows a 

future disciple 
439—44o0 

How He places a 

pupil on Proba- 
tion 446 

How He spends 
much of Histime 421 

How to attract at- 


tention of 439 
Image of, in heaven- 

world 276 
Initiation of 473 


Link of Son with 462 
looks at a person 
joining the T. S, 428 
Meditation on 445 
Pupil of 434— 436 
Pupil taken in con- 
sciousness of 461 
Pupils living with 421 
Radiation of colours 
in aura of 397—398 
Recognition of, by 
ordinary man 423 
—424 
Relation of, to ac- 
cepted pupil 461 
Relation of, to pupil 
459—460, 461, 462 
—463 
Search for 440—441 
Son of 462 
Taking a new baby 
body 416 
Union of pupil with 407 
Why He does not 
take more as- 
pirants as pupils 
36—439 


523 


PAGE 


. Master, The 


Why He makes His 
physical body aa 2 
I 


long 
Why He needs a 
physical body 421 
Work given by, to 
probationary 
pupil 456 —457 


Masters, The 


See also Adepts 
Age of 415 
and Brotherhood 359 
and the Way to 
Them 372—488 
are all linked to- 
gether 429 
are of many races 423 
Bodies of, Healthy 
and long _pre- 


served 414 
borrow bodies tem- 
porarily 415—418 


can focus Their 
consciousness at 
all levels 481 
Coming out as reli- 
gious teachers 419 
deal mostly with 
egos 420 
do not withhold 
knowledge 421—422 
Doubt about exis- 
tence of 480 
Evidence of exis- 
tence of 373—375 
Force of 434, 436, 461 
guide people to join 
the T. S. 428 
Helping the dead 419 


‘Sa4 


Masters, The 
Historical evidence 
about 
Influencing gather- 
ings of pilgrims 420 
Parishes of 419—420 
Real Founders of 
the T. S. 45, 47, 
367, 403 
Testimony of first 
hand experience 
about 3 
Testimony of re- 
ligions about 374 
Thought-forms by 419 
What binds Them 
to earth 
Where They live 
Why They do not 
remove crime and 
misery 421—422 
Why They live in 
comparative 
seclusion 416, 421, 
Why They permit 
conquest of Egypt 
and India 
Work of 277, 415— 
421, 435, 436 
Materialism 6, 19 
Materialist, Incredulity 
of the 
Mathas 
Mathematics, Why some 
learn it quickly 128 
Mathura, Northern 402 
Matthew, S., a vegeta- : 


374 


227 
278 


423 


7 
390 


rian 
Max Miiler, Prof., 
quoted 147, 163 
Maydvirupa, What is 120 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Meat habit, Difficulty of 
breaking 3 
habit, How to break 
a 35—38 
Meditation, Depression 
in 445 
How topractise 
444—445 
445 
128 


on the Master 

Prolonged 

Regularity in 83, 445 
Medium 254 
Mediums, Materialising 93 


Memory, Astral 115, 117 
Dawn of 342 
of past lives 126—129 


of past lives can be 
gained 128 
of past lives is found 
in children 128 
of the ego 125 
Physical 115, 117, 125 
Unconscious, of the 


cells 35, 89, 9o 
Mental body, The 

Functions of 82 

Growth of 82 


How formed 163—166 
is not fully devel- 
oped 270 
Matter of 82 
Meaning of colours 
in 82 
Method of growth of 83 
New for each life 126 
of advanced man ‘82 
of undeveloped man 82 
Quickened at 
Second Initiation 
474 


Segments of 84 


525 


INDEX 
PAGE PAGE 
Mental body, The Monad, The 
Shape of 82, 83 descends _ into 
Size of 82 causal body at 
Use of 78 First Initiation 470 
What is 82, 279 Ego becomes as end 
When cast off 103 of a funnel from, 
Mental elemental 71— at Initiation 471 
75, 316, 447 Ego linked to 470 


essence 
289, 292 
permanent unit 163, 164 
plane, What is 62 
world, Extent of 67 


elemental 


Mercury, Lords of 386 
planet 339, 386 
planet, Incarnation 

of 340 

Mesmeric passes 95 

Mesmerist 95 

Metempsychosis 171 


Michelet, a vegetarian 35 
Middle Ages, The 147 
Miller, Dr., on Hindu- 
ism Ir 
Milton, a vegetarian 35 
Mind, How to control 
302— 303 
group-soul 
325, 332 
Karma of the 185 
Miseries, Cause of all 42 
Classification of 4o 
Remedy for all 41 
Misery, Outward, How 


Mineral 


brought 189 
Mithra 393 
Monad, The 70, 324, 

331, 332, 333, 334, 
350, 474 


Manifesting himself 
in lower worlds 


69—71 

Mineral 316 

of form 321 
takes vow of Initi- 

ation 470 

Union of, with ego 465 

What he is 68—69, 318 

Monadic essence, 72, 174 


essence, Whatis 315 

plane 61, 69 
Moore, Prof. J. H., quot- 

ed 28 


More, Henry, taught 


Reincarnation 148 
Sir Thomas, now a 
Master 414 
Morya (M.), The Master 
Age of 403 
Appearance of 403 
as Initiator 469 


as King of Persia 417 
Assistant of Lord 
Vaivasvata Manu 
408 
Chohn of First 
Ray 4 
Constant friend and 
companion of 
Master K. H. 404 
Disciples of 403 


526 


PAGE 


Morya (M.), The Master 
Dress of 403 
Future Manu of 

sixth root-race 
4o1, 403 
Horse of 407 
House of 405—406, 414 
Influence noticeable 
i 404 


In 
Inner Head of the 
Inner School of 

the T. S. 428 
Lieutenant of Lord 
Vaivasvata Manu 
401, 403 
Living images of 
pupils of 405 
Master of H. P. 
Blavatsky 403 
Master of H.S. 
Olcott 403, 408 
Nationality of His 
body 403 
Place of His re- 
sidence 
Real Founder of the 
T. S. 45, 47, 367, 403 
Riding with Master 
K. H. 


403 


407 
Successor of Lord 
Vaivasvata Manu 
403, 408 
Motive of action affects 
character 20I—203 
of action has no 
effect on physical 
plane 20I—203 
What is 201 
Motives of action 433 
Mourners, Grief of, after 
death 261—262 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Muhammad, Pu pil of 
Lord Maitreya 397 
Muhammadanism, Key- 
note of 14 
Mulaprakriti 55 
What is 52 


Mumukshattva (Desire 
for Liberation) 455—456 


Music, Angels of 276 
Musical genius 141 
instinct and Here- 

dity 132 
NAGARJUNA, MASTER 
K.H. as 404 
Pupil of Lord 
Maitreya 397 
Narcotic drugs, Effect of 
39, 442 
Nations, Angels of 419 
Karma of 423 


Nature-spirits 370, 377, 420 
Necessity and free-will 

204—206, 225 

Nelson, a vegetarian 35 
Neo-Platonic Schools, 

The 147, 409 

Neo- Platonism 5, 411 

Neptune planet 34 
planet, Incarnation 

of 341 

Newman, Cardinal 35, 409 
Newton, Isaac, a vege- 

tarian 


Nidtdhyasana 426—427 
Nilgiri Master, The 401 
—403, 413 


see also Agastya, Rishi 
Nirmanakaya Vesture 381 
Nirmanakayas, The 267, 381 
store filled by 420 


INDEX 527 
PAGE PAGE 
Nirvanic plane 62, 376, Opportunities 
381, 475, 477, 484 Small, bring greater 
N- Rays 92, 93 45, 203 
to help 458 
OBSESSION 254 Wasted, result in 
Occult Government of frustated _long- 
the World 376 ings 203 
Hierarchy 378, 386,421 Opportunity and karma 199 


Hierarchy, Head of 377 

Hierarchy, Rays in 329 
Hierarchy, What is 

375, 381, 487 

405 

449, 468 

457 

412 


Museum 

progress 

relationship 
Occult World, The 
Occultism, No half 


measures in 438 
Offence, Taking 301 
Taking, is a hin- 

drance to Disci- 
pleship 437 


Olcott, Col. H. S., Disci- 
ple of Master M. 
403, 408 
founded the T.S. 5, 403 
Taught by Master 
Serapis 408 
Oldfield, Dr. Josiah, 
quoted 28, 36 —37 
Opportunities are earned 
by karma 
are made by desire 
186, 187—-188 
for progressin 


447 


heaven 275—276 
Grasping 225 
Making 457 
only, no rights for 

pupil 449 


How gained 189 
How to make 224—225 
Watching for 457, 458 


“ Organic nutrients ”’ 24 
Origen, quoted 156, 157, 158 
a vegetarian 35 


His De Principiits 156 
on Reincarnation 
150, 155—158 
Orpheus, Buddha as 12, 389 
Orphism, The Schools 
of 259 


Outpouring, The First 
Great 72, 313— 
315, 318, 475 
The Second Great 
72, 76, 315—317, 
318, 324, 331 
The Third Great 
317—318, 323, 
331, 332, 334, 476 
Outpourings, The Three 
Great 58, 72, 76, 313 
—3r19 
Overstreet, Prof., quoted 
368—369 
Ovid and Reincarnation 147 


PaGANn Christ, The 409 
Pain, Meaning and use 

of 350-—356 
Paley, a vegetarian 35 
Pandya kings 402 


528 
PAGE 
Paramahamsa 484 
Paranirvanic plane 61 
Pariah 169 
Parthamma 453 
Parishes of Masters 
419—420 
Parivrajaka (Wanderer) 
479 


Patanjali, quoted 342, 344 

Path, The 425, 426, 427, 477 

Aspirant on 385 
First qualification 

for approach to 432 

is always open 488 
Leading to Perfect- 

ing of Man 465—466 

Noble Eightfold 389 
No half measures 


on 438 
of Discipleship, 
First steps on 
431—432 


of Holiness 380, 456, 
466, 478, 480, 486 

of Illumination of 

Christian Church 
426—427, 466 

of Perfection of 

Christian Church 
426— 427 

of Purification of 

Christian Church 

426—427, 451, 
465, 466 

of Union (or Perfec- 

tion) of Christian 


Church 466 
Official period of 429 
Portals on 478 


Probationary 429, 
430, 441 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Path, The 
Progress on, _has- 
tened by T. S. mem- 
bers 428 
Proper 429 
Proper, Four stages 
on 478 
Qualifications for 
Probationary 
443—445 
Requirements _ for 
Probationary 
441 —445 
Second Qualification 
for approach to 433 
Three divisions of 429 
Paths, Seven, before the 
Adept 338, 380-—381 
Patience, How learnt 225 
Patigha 483 
Paul, S., quoted 74, 156, 
257, 426 
Pellagra 29 
Perception, What is 322 
Perceptual images 108 
Perfection, Path leading 
to 465 
Stage of, in Chris- 
tian Church 
Permanent atom, Astral 
163, 169 
atom, Physical 163, 165 
atoms 332 
atoms, Use of 164 
unit, Mental 163, 164 
Personality, The 437 
and individuality 71 


becomes a reflex of 
470 


ego 
Character of 80 


426 


529 


INDEX 
PAGE PAGE 
Personality, The Physical _ 

Destroyed by pain heredity 127, 141, 166 
354—355 memory IIS, 117, 125 

How its progress is rmanent atom 
wee ik 7 163, 165 
Record of progress lane 62 


O 121 
Union of, with ego 


65, 467 

What is 71, 100 

Peter, S., referred to 14, 427 

quoted 426 

a vegetarian 35 
Pezzani taught Rein- 

carnation 148 

Pharisees, The 151 


Philanthropy 45 
Philo on Reincarnation 152 
Philosophy and Theos- 


ophy 20—2I 
of life 20 
Physical body, The 


and Theosophy 88—89 
Bad habits changed 


in 89 
Cause of its shape 189 
consciousness 89 


during sleep 107—109 
Effect of thought on 
308—309 
How formed 163—166 
Peculiarity of 89 
Reason for de- 
formed 166 
Physical brain during 
sleep 108—109, 113 
elemental 89, 91 
elemental, Functions 
of 70—77 
elemental, What is 
71, /6—77 
67 


Plan’, Adi, What is 61 
Anupddaka, What is 61 
Astral, What is 62 
Atmic, What is 62 
Buddhic, What is 62 
Divine, What is 61 
Mahaparanirvanic, 

What is 61 
Mental, What is 62 
Nirvanic, What is 62 
Paranirvanic, What F 

IZ 


iS 
Planes of Nature, The 
Seven 
Contact of men with 67 
How man contacts 


them 67, 101—~102 
Location on earth of 61 
Meaning of 59 
Names of 6r1—62 
Relation to earth of 60 
Subdivisions of each 

of 62—65 


Why we are nor- 
mally unconscious 
f 


o 65 
Planetary Logoi, Cosmic 

52, 54 

Logoi, Solar 34 

Scheme, What is 341 

Spirits 54 

Planets, How formed 59 

Plato, quoted 20, 128 

a vegetarian 34 

on Reincarnation 147 


330 


PAGE 


Plutarch, a vegetarian 
Population of the World 


Increase of, ex- 
plained 134—135 
Powers, Development of 
latent 18 
Proof of superphysi- 
cal,inman 6 
Prajapatis 54 


Prana 91, 99, 107, 308 
and physical vehi- 
cle 


Fate of, at death 231 
What is 94—96 
Pranic aura 120 
Pratyagatma 35 

Pratyeka Buddha, The 
Initiation of 382 
Why so called 386 
Work of 386 
Prayer, Combined 306 
Prayers and Law of 

Karma 

for the dead, How 
offered 262—264 

for the dead, Value 
262—263 
305—306 
180 


215 


of 
Helping by 
Predestination 
Pre-existence of the soul 
149, 150, 151, 155 
Presentation of Christ 
in the Temple 
Prevision by ego during 


475 


sleep 112 
Pride 80, 458 
Bar to progress 457 


Colour for, in 
mental body 82 
Fetter of 485 


34 Pride, 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


Hindrance to 
Discipleship 436 
Principles of Man, Seven 
98—99 
of right and wrong 127 
Probation 405, 429, 450 
Ceremony of = = 446 
consists in testing 
pupil 459—460 
Elder people on 456 
Method of taking a 


man on 445—447 
Object of 445—446 
Period of time for 459 
Tests of 460 


Younger people on 456 
Probationary Path, The 
429, 430, 441 
Intervals between 
stageson 462—463 
of the Buddhist 466 
of the Hindu 466 
Qualifications for 
443—445 
Qualifications for 
approach to 
432—433 
Requirements for 
441—445 
Probationary Pupil, The 
Advice to, by 
Master 456—459 
Expectations from 460 
Four qualifications 
required from 
452—456, 461 
Hindrances to447—450 
Life of 451—456 
Relation of, to his 
Master 459—460 


INDEX 531 
PAGE PAGE 
Probationary Pupil, The Pupil, Method of his 
Work given to, by getting initiated 
Master 456—457 469—472 


Work to be accom- 
plished by 451—456 
Problems of life, Deeper 1 
Prosperity and Karma 217 


Proteins 24, 37 
Proto-elements, How 
formed 59, 63 
Protyle 64 
Psychic powers 145 
Punishment, Eternal 245 


No, in Karma 213—215 
Pupil, Accepted 
can be switched off 


by Master 462 
Ego of 462 
Relation of, to 

Master 461 
Taken into Master’s 

consciousness 461 


Useful to World- 
Teacher when He 


comes 469 
What is 461 

Pupil, Causal body of 
80, 482 


Effect of lending his 

body to Master 417 
Expectations from 

one who aspires 

to bea 434—435 
How he catches at- 

tention of Master 435 
-Initiate 472 
-Initiate, Presented 

to the King after 

Third Initiation 475 
Meaning of 434—435 
Mental body of 482 


Method of taking 
him on Probation 
445—447 
Opportunities only, 
no rights for 449 
Presented to the 
Mahachohan at 
each stage 462 
Presented to the 
Mahachohan _be- 
fore Initiation 469 
Probationary, see 
Probationary pupil 
Relations between 
Master and 459— 
460, 461, 462, 463 
Senior 446 
Senior, guiding 
younger pupil 
450—451 
Senior, takes new 
Initiate to Bud- 
dhic plane 471 
Son of the Master 462 
Son’s link with the 


Master 462 
Tested during Pro- 
bation 459—460 


Three stages of his 
contact with 


Master 459—462 
Training in astral 

work to 436 
Why he is put on 

Probation 446 
Work ofa 434—436 


Younger, guided by 
senior pupil 450—451 


532 


PAGE 
Pupils, Higher, Where 
they live after 
death 278 


living with a Master 421 

of Lord Maitreya 
396 — 397 

of the King 383, 386, 
390, 393, 475 

of the King, Names 
f 386 


O 
of the King, Work 
386 


The Hindu 
386, 388 
Purgatory 271 
Long-enduring 246 
Use of 254—256 
What is 245 
Purification, Festival of 
the 
Stage of, in Christian 
Church 426—427, 
451, 465, 466 
is a negative 
virtue 426 
Key-note of, in 
Zoroastrianism 12, 


280 

Real, What is 31—32 

Pythagoras 393, 413 

a Vegetarian 34 

Master K.H.as 404 
taught Reincarna- 

147 


tion 


O 
Puranas, 


Purity 


QuaLiries, Evil, persist 
in later lives 
Evolution of social 


164 


and moral 138 
Feminine 169—171 
How formed 137 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Qualities, Human, How 
evolved 139 
Masculine 169—171 
Transmission of 138, 
140, 142 
Quaternary, Lower 99 
RADIATING vibration of 
thought 283—285 
Raja Yoga 374 
Rajas 429, 430 
Use of 430 
Rakoczi, The Master 
410—413 


Appearance of 413 
as Baron Hompesch 
412 


as Christian Rosen- 


creutz 411 
as Comte de S. 
Germain 410, 412 


as Francis Bacon 411 


as Ivan Rakoczi 412 
as John Hunyadi 411 
as Proclus AII 
as Robertus’' the 
Monk 4rr 
as Roger Bacon 411 
as S. Alban 410 
Dress of 413 
Head of Seventh 
Ray 412 
Influence of the 


splendour of His 
Presence 413 
Languages spoken 


y 
Manners of 
Met by Bishop 
Leadbeater 413 


INDEX 533 
PAGE PAGE 
Rakoczi, The Master Ray, The 7th (of Ceremo- 
resembles the Maha- nial magic) 329 
chohan 413 », Head of 412 
Residence of 413 » influence of 
Robes worn by 413 330, 412 
Work of 412 » What it in- 
wrote plays as volves 330 
Shakespeare 411 Rays, The Seven 331, 
Ramanujacharya, Master 382, 399 
Jesus as 410 » Initiations on 
Pupil of Lord 382—383 
Maitreya 397 » Whatare 328—330 
Ray, Each, has aChohan Recapitulation Theory, 
as the Head 382 The 312 
Ruling or First 329 Recognising a friend 
Ray, The rst (of Strength astrally 118 
or Power) 329 Reincarnation 122—179 
» Head of 329 A Christian doctrine 
»» Highest Initia- 149—159 
tion on 382 among the Jews 
The 2nd (of Wis- 149—152, 154 
dom) 329 and conscience 144 
» Head of 329, and Darwinian 
378, 386 evolution 145 
»» Highest Initia- and death of a babe 
tion on 383 145—-146 
The 3rd (of Adapta- and difference be- 
bility or Tact) 329 tween children 130 
» Characteristic and Divine Justice 144 
of 408 and genius 144 
» Head of 408 and Law of Here- 
The 4th (of Beauty di 
or Harmony) 329 , aie 
, Head of y 408 and misfortune 144 
The 5th (of Science) 329 «84 modern Christi- 
» Head of 409 anity = 159—160 
The 6th (of Devo- and psychic powers 145 
tion) 309 and sex 169—171 
» Dominance of 330 and social condition 144 
» Head of 410 and solution of 
»» Influence of 412 several problems 144 


534 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 


PAGE 
nation Religion, Study of com- 
Belief among Bud- parative z 8 5 16 
dhists in _—s:148_—s Religions, All, have same 
Belief among Hindus teachings 
in 4 Essentials of all, are 
Character explained the same 9, 10 
b 137 Founders of 10 


y 
Conditions for 


Great, are like re- 


finishing 174—175 servoirs of one 
Criminal explained Spiritual water 418 
by 144 Key-notes of 9, 11—15 


Factors which 
determine 160—162 
Genius explained by 


Origin and essence 
of all, are same 8 
Reason for variety 


140—142 of 
Goal of 174 Reasons for appar- 
in religions 146—149 ent difference 
into animal bodies between 
150, 171—173 Spiritual life in IO 
ate on 150 Study of all, is 
ethod of 123 necessary to know 
Moral necessity for Truth 
143—145 Various, are 
Necessary logically methods of search 
135—137 after God 
Necessity for 135—145 Religious version of the 
Number of people Law of Karma 184 
believing in 146—149 Repentance of sins 193, 
Object of 122, 170 195—197 
Origen on 150, 155 Result of activities on 
—158 ourselves 18 
Savage explained by of aspirations 187 
136, 141, 144 of charity oo 
Scientific necessity of cruelty 167, +89 
for 137143 of experiences — 
of lack of experience192 
What draws an ego sk cauch eflort 18 
to 174 of obedience to 
What is 122 Law 190 
Religion, Basis of 8 of opportunities of 


for a savage nation 8 service grasped 203 


INDEX. 535 

PAGE PAGE 

inful experi- Rosicrucians, The 4rIr 

—_— wad I Rossetti believed in Re- 3 

ieving suffer- incarnation I 

. Pg = 214 pager ere Fifth ve 

ted thoughts at isa I 

sa ie 137, 189 Rupa Loka 63, 276 

of selfish feeling 244 Ruparaga 485 
of selfishness 202,215 Rydberg, Prof. Victor, 

of strong desire 187, 189 quoted ‘152 

of transgression of 

Law I SACRIFICE 431 

of want of sympathy 194 Law of 197 

of wasted oppor- The Great 387 

tunities 203 Sakadagadmi 481 

of will for unselfish Sakkayaditthi 479 

service 187 Salvation 372, 382 
Resurrection 171 Christian doctrine 

The 466, 473, of 256—259 

476—477, 484, 485 Final 466, 478, 486 


Revelation, The 
Richardson, Sir B. W., 


155 


quoted 24 
Rickets 29 
Right and wrong 128, 

342, 343 
Principles of 127 


Righteousness, Key-note 

of, in Hebraism 
Roman ideal 

Root-race 334, 341, 378, 
380, "387 

Aryan (Fifth) 336, 
337, 338, 341, 388, 401 

Atlantean’ (Fourth) 
336, 337, 338, 341,387 

Lemurian (Third) 
336, 337, 338, 383 
Meaning of 335-338 

Sixth 337, 338, 367, 
‘401, "403, "408 
Rosengreufz, Christian | 411 


Idea of, among 
eastern nations 259 
Meaning of 296 
Samddhana (Balance) 455 
Sambhogakdya Vesture 381 


Samyojana 479 
Sanaka 386 
Sananda 386 
Sanatana 386 
Sanat Kumara 385 


See also The 
‘“ King” and the 


Lord of the 
V 
Sansdra 
Sapphira 438 
Sattva 429 
Use of 430 
Saturn men 329 
planet 54, 340 
Satyrs 267 


INDEX ak 
PAGE PAGE 
254 Shankaracharya, Shi.” 
men 34 established Mathas 390 
Sensual love, How puri- forbade anima! 
fied 443 sacrifice 390 
Sensualist, Condition revived Hinduism 390 
after death of a sage Sharp peoetee in Rein- 
Sensualit Oo carnation — I 
Colout of, in astral Shatsampatts (Good 
body Conduct) 453—455 
Serapis, The Master Shattriya and brother- 
Appearance of _ hood 364 
408—409 Dharma of the 344 
Head Shaw, Bernard, a vege- 


of Fourth 
408 


ay 
Nationality of His 
body 
Special line of 408 
taught Col. Olcott 408 


Work of 408 
Service 14, 434, 446, 459 
Accumulated karma 

of 463 
Definite 458 
Kinds of 432 
of Man 432 


Result of unselfish 187 
Unselfish 435 
Unselfish, First step 
to the Path 433 
Sex and Reincarnation 
169-—171 
Fgo has no 170 
Number of incarna- 
tions in each 171 
Shade, Astral 171, 267 
Astral, What it is 269 
Shakespeare 411 
Shama (Control of 
thought) 453—454 
Shamballa 385, 386 
Shankaracharya, Shri 393 


tarian 

Shell, Astral 171, 263, 
267, 277 
Astral, What is 269 
Magnetic 117 
Shelley, a vegetarian 35 
Shiva 54, 55, 318, 376 
Shraddhé (Confidence) 455 


Shradhas, Object of 
Hindu 263 
Shravana 425 


Shudra and brotherhood 364 


Dharma of the 343 
Silabbataparamdasa 480 
Silent Watcher, The 
Initiation of 382 
What is 380 
Work of 380 
Silesius, Angelus, 
quoted 258 

Sin, Forgiveness of 
192—195 

is the result of 

condition of 
ignorance 192 

What is 191—192 
Sins against love 456 
Sisyphus, Myth of 248 


538 


PAGE 


Sleep and death, com- 
pared 231 
and death, Differ- 
ence between 98 
Astral body in 85, 
87—88, 110, 113 
Condition of a man 
during 96-—98 
Condition ofa 
savage during 97 
Condition of ad- 
vanced man dur- 
ing 97 
Condition of ordi- 
nary man during 97 
Ego in I1O0O—112 
Ego of a savage in I10 
— brain dur- 
109, 113 
Helping others dur- 
ingour 306—308 
Last thought before 117 
Physical body dur- 
ing 107—109 
Physical brain dur- 
108—109, 113 


ing 
Whether a man 
dies during 98 
Socrates 254 
a vegetarian 34 
Sohan 479 
Solar Deity 58, 384 
Logos 53, 54, 375 


Logos, What Heis 52 
Planetary Logoi, g 


Seven 4 
System 341 
System and God 

49—67 


System, By whom 
built SI—55 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 

Solar System, How 
formed 57—59 
Solidarity of Man 4,12 
Son of the Master 462 
Sonship 469 
Sorrow, Use of 124 


Soul, Age of the 130, 
143, 144 
Animal- ror, 323—324 
Animal group- 324 
—326, 331, 332, 470 
Body for the 79 
Elemental group- 332 
Great, born among 


the degraded 168 
Group-, see Group- 
soul 
Home of the 123 


Mineral group- 325, 332 
Mother- 139 
of animal tor, 173, 


323—324 

of man 1o1, 173, 
470, 472 

of man, What is 69, 
79, 150, 332 
Plant- 326 


Pre-existence of 
the 149, 150, 151, 155 

reviews past life 
after death 126 

Vegetable g roup- 


324, 352 
Southey taught Rein- 
carnation 148 
Spencer, Herbert, 
quoted 310 
Spirit 99, 123, 149, 359 
Birth of the 473 
Festival of the Holy 9 


539 


INDEX 

PAGE PAGE 

Spirit, Human 488 Suicides and spiritual- 
in man 205, 477 istic séance 253 

in man, What is 69 are found in astral 
Liberated 487 slum 243 

of Intuition 482 Condition of, after 
The Descent of the death 250—254 
Holy 466, 473, Summerland 244 
477,485 Superstition 454 
The Holy 55, 318 Fetter of 480—481 

Spirits, Planetary 54 Killed out by Theos- 
Seven, before the ophy 3 
throne of God 54, 328 Sin against love 456 


Spiritual darkness 194 
life for a house- 
holder 429—432 
selfishness 175 
Spiritualist 244 
Spiritualistic séances 96, 
253, 267 
Spirituality, What is 431 
Star inthe East, The 473 
of Initiation, The 384 
Subba Row, Swami 
T., visited Rishi 
Agastya 
Sub-planes 62—65 
Sub-race 341, 378 
Austral-American 4o1 
Meaning of 335—338 
Sufferings and past 
karma 
in astral world, Use 
O 254—256 
of holy people, 
Cause of 218—219 
Sufis, The, quoted 57, 440 
and Reincarnation 147 
Suicide, Folly in 252—253 
Guilt of 254 
is not in a man’s 
_ 218 


403 


218 


Survival of the fittest 
14, 138 

Swedenborg, a_ vege- 
tarian 35 


Sympathy, Karma of 183 
TALISMANS 409 
Talleyrand, quoted 196 
Tamas, Use of 429 
Tamil Academy 402 
Tanha 174, 278 
Tantalus, Myth of 248 
Tehuti or Thoth 388 

Teaching of 12 
Tendencies, What are 127 


Tennyson believed in 
Reincarnation 148 
Tertullian, a vegetarian 35 
Testament, New, referred 
to 159, 394, 395 
quoted 152, 195 
Old, quoted 150 
Theosophical conce p- 
tion of God 5o—5r 
knowledge and 


vegetarianism 22 
lecture 229 
literature 6, 427 


principles 46 


540 THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE PAGE 
Theosophical Society, 
The 


Outer Head of the 
Inner School of 428 


Theosophical science, 
Student of 20 
Theosophical Society, 
The 


Advantages of join- 


ing 44—48 

and _ Brotherhood 
21, 357 

and Vegetarianism 
21—39 

Aspirant helped by 
427—429 


Cardinal policy of 17 
Emphasis on Bro- 
therhood in 367 
First object of 7 
Founded by Master 
M. through 
H. P. B. and 


H.S. QO. 403 
Founding of 367 
Growth of 6 
hastens progress of 

aspirant 428 


Inner Head of the 
Inner School of 428 
Inner School of 428 
is a power-house 47 
Master looks at a 
person joining 428 
Masters guide 
people to join 428 
Member of, and 
religion 17 
Members of, have 
freedom of belief 16 
Motto of 16 
Need for starting 6 
One chief value of 
Joining 46 


Real Founders of 
45, 47, 367, 403 

Second object of 
8—9, 16 

The one obligatory 
object of 357 
Third object of 18 
Three objects of 7 
When started 4—5 

Why its members 

are vegetarians 
2I—22 

Why many cannot 
help joining 45 

works for all reli- 
gions 17 


Theosophical S ystem, 


Eclectic 
teaching, Pillars of 154 
truths 229 


Theosophist, Who isa 47 


Why one should 
become a 43—44 


Theosophy, Advantage 


of the spread of 7 
and Constitution of 
Man 68—121 
and marriage 39-—4o0 
and modern science, 
Antagonism _ be- 
tween 18—19 
and narcotics 39 
and philosophy 20—21 
and physical body 
88—89 


and religion, Dif- 
ference between 17 


INDEX 


PAGE 

Theosophy and religious 
scriptures 2 

and _ Rosicrucian 
teaching 411 

and the T. S., Rela- 
tion between 4 
and wine 39 


Basis of all religions 15 
Facts of, Whether 


demonstrable 21 
Fundamental prin- 
ciples of 
Hidden root of all 
religions I 
is a science 19—20 


Key to all religions 16 
kills out supersti- 
tion 
may be called a re- 
ligion in itself 15—-16 
Modern, What is 20 
Objection to 2 
Sai of teachings 
O 
Practical applica- 


tion of 4 
Teachings of 2,3 
Ten good reasons 

for 43—44 


Test of usefulnessof 5 
Unselfish code of 2 


Usefulness of 3 

What is 1—48 

Why many people 
dislike 2 


Why some man 
takes it up imme- 
diately 128 


541 


PAGE 


Thought builds character 


186—187, 282 
can modify desire- 
nature 224 
-control, How to 
acquire 302—303 
Control of 115, 444, 453 
Direct and indirect 
actions of 280—28r 
Effect of, on astral 
body 282 
Effect of, on causal 
body 282 
Effect of, on mental 
body 281— 282 
Effect of, on physi- 
cal matter 308—309 
Effects of, on man 
281—283 
Effects of, outside of 
man 281, 283—~ 
285, 287—290 
-form and aura of 
person thought of 292 
-form, Colours in 289 
-form, Duration of 


time of 289 
-form of a fault 196 
-form of anger 292 
-form of love by 

mother 292 
-form of selfish 

affection 283 


-form, Principles for 
production of 289 

-form vivified by 
ego 265, 274 


-form, What is287—289 
-form, Work of 
289—290 


Thorndike, Prof. E.L. 169 
Thought aimed at others, 
Action of 291—292 


542 
PAGE 


Thought forms a habit 281 
-forms by Masters 419 
-forms by prayer 263 
-forms, Classification 

of 290—~295 
-forms in astral 
world 242 
-forms, Selfish 270 
-forms, Three classes 
of 291—295 
-forms, Unselfish, in 
’ heaven 
Habit of, How cre- 
ated 186—187 
How it shows itself 
279 
Last, before death 
266—267 
Last, before sleep 117 
- power 
-power, Action and 
use of 279—309 
-power, Character 
built by know- 
ledge of §298—300 
-power, Evolution 
forwarded by 295 
-power, How to help 
others by know- 
ledge of 
-power, Scriptures 
of the world on 280 
-power, Uses of 
knowledge of 295 
Radiating vibration 
of 283—285 
-radiation 283—285 
-radiation, Adapta- 
bility of 


270 


303 


285 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Thought-radiation, Dis- 
tance covered by 284 
-radiation, Effect of 284 
-radiation, Strength 


of 284 
Result of repeated 

187, 189 
Self-centred, Action 

of 293—294 
Useless, How to 

avoid 296—298 
Vague, Action of 

294—295 

What is 279 
Throne of Dakshina- 

murtl 470 
Ttttksha (Endurance) 

454—455 

Tolerance (Uparati) 454 
Transfiguration, Feast 

of 475 


The 466, 473, 474— 
476, 482—484 


Transmigration 171 
Triad, Higher, 99, 100 

Spiritual 163 
Triangle, The Great 376 
Tribhuvanam 463 
Triloki 463 
Trinity 52, 53, 54 
Trishna 174 
Truth, Karma of 217 


Reason for its ap- 
parent difference 


in religions II 

The many-sided 9 
Truths, Theosophical 229 
Tsong -ka-pa 396 


INDEX 


PAGE 

UppHACHCHA 485 
Unconscious memory of 

the cells 35, 89, 9o 
Undesirable emotions, 
Effect of, on higher 

bodies 450 
Universal Brotherhood 

4,7, 9, 47, 55, 368 

Love 481 

Unselfish thoughts in 

heaven 270 

Upacharo 453 
Upanishat, The, quoted 

57, 356 

Uparati (Tolerance) 454 

Uranus planet 54 


planet, Incarnation 
of 340 


VAIRAGYA (Desireless- 
ness) 452—453 


Vaishakh ceremony 391 
—393 


Theoso- 


ceremony, ” 
3 


phists at 
Vaishya and Brother- 
hood 364 
Dharma of the 344 
Vaivasvatu Manu, The 
Lord 
Appearance of 4o1 
Assistant of 408 
at First Initiation 470 
at Second Initiation 
481 
Emigrations of, for 
sub-races 400 
House of 398, 401 
Lieutenant of 4o1z, 403 
on Sex 169 


543 


PAGE 


Vaivasvatu Manu, The 


Lord 
Representative Man 
of fifth root-race 4o1 
Representative of 
the Lord of the 
World 377 
Successor of 403, 408 
Work in hand by 4or1 
;Work in the past 


oO 
Valhalla of the Norse- 


man 244 
Vandidad, The, Reincar- 
nation in 147 


Vasus 54 
Vaughan, Thomas, now 


a Master 414 
Vedas, Hindu 388 
Vegetable = group-soul 

324, 332 
Karma of the 185 


Vegetarian diet 
Endurance tests for 29 
gives greater endur- 

ance 29—3r1 
More natural to 
man 28—29 
produces less animal 
passion 31 
Proof of its superi- 
ority over flesh 


food 31 
Superior to flesh 
diet 23—31 
vegetarianism 2I—3Y 
Whether it is prac- 
ticable 23 


Venetian Master, The 
Appearance of 408 
Characteristic of 408 


544 


PAGE 


Venetian Master, The 
Head of Third Ray 408 
Nationality of His 
body 408 
Venus men 329 
planet 54, 386 
planet, Incarnation 
O 340 
planet, Lords of the 
Flame came 
from 384, 390, 475 
Vicarious atonement 


197—198 

Vichtkichha 480 

Viciousness and Karma 216 

Vigilance, Sleepless 457 

Virgil and Reincarna- ; 
14 


tion 


Vishnu 53, 55, 318, 376 
Vision, Clear, before 
rebirth 278 


Viveka (Discrimination) 
452, 453, 464 

Voice of the Silence, The, 

quoted 175, 196, 
213—214, 432 


How given 409 
How written 374 
Vulcan planet 54 


planet, Incarnation 
O 340 
Vyasa, The Buddha as 388 


WASHINGTON, BOOKER 


. 169 
Wealth, Cause of 188 
Desire for 188 


Web of atomic matter 118 

Weissmann’s evolution- 
ary teaching 137—142 

Wellington, a vegetarian 35 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


PAGE 
Wesley, a vegetarian 35 


White Island, The 386 
Whitsun Day 477 
Will, Divine, see Divine 
Will 
What is 187 
Wisdom Aspect of the 
Logos 376, 379 
How gained 189 
Ray of 329 


Wisdom of Solomon, The, 
quoted 147, ISI 
Wood, Dr. J., quoted 31 
Woodhead, Prof. G. S., 
quoted 30 
Wordsworth believed in 
Reincarnation 148 
Work, Astral 459 
Reward of success- 
ful, is more work 458 
World-period 385, 387 
-period, What is 341 
World-Teacher, The to, 
II, 12, 14 
See The Christ, 
also Lord 
Maitreya 
Assistant of 407 
Assistant of Lord 
Buddha 378 
Coming of 368, 398, 
409, 415, 417, 468 
Crown of His work 383 
Helpers of, in 
physical body 
468—469 
Initiation of (the 
Bodhisattva) 382 
Method of His 
coming 393 


345 


INDEX 
PAGE PAGE 
World-Teacher, The Yoga, Jnana 440 
passes away from Karma 429, 431, 440 
the world on Practice of 127 
attainment of Raja 374 
Buddhahood 389 Requirements of 442 
Representative of Science of 441 
Lord Buddha What is 441 
377, 378, 387 

takes Buddha Ini- ZERWANKE AKRANE 5I 
tiation 383 Zoroaster 132 
What is 379 a Vegetarian 35 
Work of 379, 380 Buddha as the first 388 

Worry 453, 461 Original, had bor- 
Effect of, on astral rowed a body 417 

body 286 Zoroastrianism 10, 51, 
Effect of, on mental 54, 55 
body 449 Key-note of 12, 280 

What is 301 Reincarnation in 
146—147 

XEROPHTHALMIA 25 Symbology of Fire 
in 388 

YoGA, Bhakti 440 Zoroastrian Scripture, 
How accomplished 443 quoted 280 


a a es 
Printed by J. R. Aria, at the Vasanta Press, Adyar, Madras, 


i 


THEOSOPHY EXPLAINED 


in Questions and Answers 
BY 
P. PAVRI, B.Sc., L.C.E. 
Over 550 pages with 4 coloured illustrations 


piles: ere Edition, Boards, Rs, 2-12 
— Foreign Edition, Cloth and gold, Rs. 4-8 





“ . . . This work of Mr. Pavri will undoubtedly be 
found very useful by a large number of those who are 
approaching Theosophy. The questions have been 
carefully selected and deal with ten topics— 

« Wuat Tuxosoruy Is ;s Gop AND THE SotaR System ; 
Tar Constitution oF Man; REINCARNATION ; Karma; 
Lire arter DeatH ; THovucsT Powrr: Its ACTION AND 
Use; THe Evo.ution or List; BrorHeRrHoop ; AND THE 
Masrturs anD THE Way TO THEM. 

« ... He will have a circle of students to whom this 
book will bring great help. The answers are very 
readable, and the easy style of writing enables the 
author to keep the attention of the enquirer. The book 
ts a welcome addition to our Theosophical literature.”’ 


C. JINARAJADASA. 


“It is impossible to over-estimate the value of this 
book. Every one of the rather troublesome questions 
that are continually being propounded to the Theos- 
ophist is here stated and adequately dealt with. The 
answers to the supposed questions are all clear and 
exhaustive. We realise that this definite and orderly 
method of instruction is one of the many assets of the 
scientific mind . . . We can confidently recommend 
this volume to every class of Theosophist.” 


Theosophy in Australia. 


ii 


« ... It is with regard to this practical aspect of 
Theosophy that Prof. P. T. Pavri has compiled his 
work, so as to place the whole subject in clear and 
decided light before the general reader ... That 
his presentation has been eminently successful will 
be apparent to all who glance through the pages of 
the book, which is most conveniently arranged so 
that it is equally useful to the continuous reader and 
one who prefers to dip here and there. 


“T should strongly recommend this book also to 
Theosophical study groups in Lodges and elsewhere, 
particularly as a Theosophical dictionary or companion 
to be resorted to when difficulties and doubts arise. 
It is up-to-date, and full of useful detail.”’ 


Ernest Woop, 
Principal, Sind National College. 


« ... Prof. P. T. Pavri of the Sind National 
College has just written the above book ... Altoge- 
ther the book is an acquisition to Theosophical 
literature. It will be a splendid class book for groups 
of students as well as a propagandist. Members of 
the T.S. will do well to present it to enquiring 


friends ... ” 
The Cherag. 


“ ... Your last book (Theosophy Haplained) was 


very useful... ” 
C. JINARAJADASA. 


To be had of : 
T. P.H., Adyar, Madras. Mr. P. Payri, B.Sc., L.C.E. 
Indian Book-Shop Theosophical Society 


Benares City. Adyar, Madras. 


THE COMING WORLD-TEACHER 


In Questions and Answers 


By P. PAVRI, B.Sc., L.C.E. 


‘ Quite a useful little book.”’ 
Dr. ANNIE BESANT 


¢¢ T commend, therefore, Professor Pavri’s book to the 
widest possible circle of readers, to young and to old, 
to Jews, to Christians, to Mussalmans, to Buddhists, 
to Parsees, to Jains, to Hindus, to those whose deep- 
est truths are unexpressed in terms of faith or creed.” 


Dr. G. S. ABUNDALE 


Mr. Krishnamurti, the Head of the Order, calls it 
“an extremely interesting book and a very useful 
compilation,” of ‘‘a great service to the Order ”’ “ by 
its wide usefulness to the Star movement ”’. 


In his Editorial Notes in The Herald of the Star 
he says: 


“T should like to bring to the notice of Star mem- 
bers an excellent book compiled by Mr. Pavri, of 
Adyar ...an extremely useful compilation and 
of immense help to Star members and especially to 
Star lecturers. ... ” 


“ ... Bishop Leadbeater received with thanks 
- +. & copy of your book The Coming World-Teacher 
—in Questions and Answers, a companion to your 


book Theosophy Hoplained. He is glad to see that 


iv 


you have so carefully applied yoursalf to the study 
of the literature necessary to compile these useful 
works and hopes that they will have a useful 


career...” 

« .. . Mr. Pavri has made himself master of every- 
thing .. . on this subject that is attracting an ever- 
increasing number of thinking people... for he 
has classified the knowledge and arguments on 
the subject with singular brevity and yet remark- 
able clearness . . . Those to whom the idea 
is new may be advised to read this book care- 
fully and without judgment until they have finished 
it and then see what they think about the subject, 
for here is an array of arguments that is very 
convincing ... It can be specially recommended to 
members of the Star who wish to know exactly what 
their own movement is aiming at... ” 


Ernest Woop, 
Nattonal Representative for America, 
Order of the Star in the Hast. 


“It would be difficult to over-estimate the value 
of this most practical and useful book. Professor 
Pavri has gathered together in attractive and 
accessible form a mass of thought and teaching 
regarding the Great Event for which we all long. 
His style is clear and temperate, his arrangement 
admirable. . . . The spirit of his work throughout 
is simple and sincere. This is a book which ought 
to be in the hands of every Star worker and lecturer 

99 


The Star in the Hast—Sydney, 
Australian Division. 


AVAILABLE AT: : 
The Indian Star Headquarters, Adyar, Madras 


Superior Edition (Cloth), Re. 1-8. Post Free, Re. 1-10. 
Popular - is As. 12 _ ,, » As. 14, 


THE MESSAGE OF THE STAR 


in Question and Answers 


Abridged from ‘The Coming World-Teacher ’ 


By P. PAVRI 


aed 


Price : As. 3; 50 Copies, Rs. 8; 100 Copies, Rs. 15. 


Se) 


The Indian Star Headquarters, Adyar, Madras 


erate art serena 
(qats Tate % waa) 


_ 'THEOSOPHY (in Hindi) 
In Questions and Answers 


467 Pages. Price Re. 1 


ae aodt oft aed sa geaeat agar 
GAT A agra | ws at freraratat ate gar 
frritat ef feedt gect adt sr get wg ae 
WIA BIS AGA FL... ..- 


Ceaat act tet & f& ae feedt areaare at 
ae WZ Aer WS TN Ws at We saws aT 
aama acat andi @ | gafea a ga gees at aa 


Indian Book-Shop Prof. R. K. Kulkarni 
T. 8. Compound Theosophical Book-Depot 
Benares City Lashkar, Gwalior 


