Asclepius
This page intentionally left blank
    ASCLEPIUS
The Perfect Discourse of
 Hermes Trismegistus


        edited and translated by

      Clement Salaman




LON DON  Þ  0 ' 9  &' . * +  Þ  0 ' 9  YO4 -  Þ  SY DN ';
                       Bloomsbury Academic
                An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc

      50 Bedford Square                             1385 Broadway
           London                                     New York
         WC1B 3DP                                     NY 10018
             UK                                          USA

                         www.bloomsbury.com

        First published in 2007 by Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd.

                        © Clement Salaman 2007

Clement Salaman has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and
        Patents Act, 1988, to be identiﬁed as Author of this work.

   All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
   transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval
     system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.

No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting
on or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication
               can be accepted by Bloomsbury or the author.


         British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
  A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

                     ISBN: PB: 978-0-7156-3564-3
                           ePUB: 978-1-4725-3771-3
                           ePDF: 978-1-4725-3772-0


       Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.

                          Typeset by Ray Davies
                        Contents


Acknowledgements                    7
List of Illustrations                9
Introduction                        11
Notes to the Introduction           48
Translator’s Note                   51


TRANSLATION of the ASCLEPIUS       53


Bibliography                        99
Index                              101




                            5
This page intentionally left blank
                Acknowledgements

I would like to thank all those who have assisted in the prepa-
ration of this book. There are friends who have given particu-
larly valuable help and whom I would like to mention by name.
First of all I must mention my wife, Juliet, without whose
encouragement and toil (at times painful!) this book would not
have appeared. I am also extremely grateful to Arthur Farndell
for many major improvements in the text and introduction, to
Valery Rees for detailed help on the notes and useful sugges-
tions on subjects needing to be covered, and to Dr Joseph Milne
for profound insights into the early Christian Church and for
the suggestion that a passage on Dionysius should be included
in the Introduction. I am also grateful to Dr Jeremy Naydler for
inspiring this translation and finding time during an extremely
busy period to answer questions for me on Ancient Egypt, and
for making many useful suggestions on the Introduction and
Translation. I must thank Jill Line for useful comments on the
Introduction and above all for compiling the Index. Dr Angela
Voss has been of great help to me in drawing attention to
passages from St Augustine and St Thomas Aquinas and also
to her own paper, ‘From Allegory to Anagoge: The Question of
Symbolic Perception in a Literal World’. I would also like to
thank Geoffrey Pearce and Bruce Ramell for their comments on
astronomy and music respectively, and Anna McLelland for


                               7
                            Asclepius


spending many hours helping me to revise the translation.
Susan Gandar has drawn my attention to the importance of the
work of King Alphonso X of Castile, for which I an grateful. A
big penultimate note: I do wish to record enormous gratitude to
my daughter-in-law Prabh for rescuing my wife and myself
from drowning in a sea of ‘computery’ while composing the final
draft. Last, but by no means least, I would like to record my debt
to the late Joan Crammond who devotedly typed the first drafts
of the translation.




                                8
               List of Illustrations

Figure 1. Spell 125 from the Book of the Dead. Ani and
  his wife Tutu watch as his heart is weighed against a
  feather representing Maat (Justice).                    19
Figure 2. Prince Khaemweset, son of Rameses III, from
  the Valley of the Queens.                               23
Figure 3. Statue of Akhenaten from Karnac, showing
  both male and female characteristics.                   30
Figure 4. Hermes Trismegistus by Giovanni di Stefano,
  Siena Cathedral.                                        42
Figure 5. Isis with Hermes Trismegistus and Moses by
  Pinturicchio, Room of the Saints, Borgia Apartments,
  Vatican.                                                43




                              9
This page intentionally left blank
                      Introduction

The Asclepius, together with its sister book, the Corpus Her-
meticum, contains the philosophic wisdom ascribed in ancient
times to the Egyptian god Thoth (or Tehuti), who was said by
St Augustine (354-430 AD) to have lived on earth at the same
time as Moses. The Greek original (now lost) of the Latin text
from which this book was translated, was probably composed
between 100 and 300 AD in Alexandria. The earliest record of
our Latin version is the use of it by St Augustine for quotation.
   The original title of Asclepius was Logos teleios, ‘the perfect
discourse’. Why that title? The author said that it had ‘more
divine power than any I have previously spoken’. It seems to
express his deepest thoughts on the Oneness of the universe
and the true, divine nature of Man. ‘Hermes’ influenced early
Christianity and has inspired some of the greatest thinkers in
the West from Dionysius, through Isaac Newton (who trans-
lated the Hermetic Emerald Tablet), to Ralph Waldo Emerson.


                          The setting

The opening of the Asclepius creates an atmosphere of intense
fervour and expectation. The setting is Egyptian, but the emo-
tion is universal. It is one where disciples wait expectantly to
hear mysterious secrets from their teacher which they hope will


                               11
                            Asclepius


transform their lives. The master is insistent upon secrecy. No
one is allowed to hear the conversation except three special
disciples: Asclepius, Tat and Hammon. Asclepius’ name was
famous, for his grandfather was the first outstanding doctor of
antiquity and was made a god after his death. He was honoured
in Greece and Rome as well as in Egypt. His grandson was now
devoting himself to the wise Hermes to study philosophy, the
art of healing the soul. Hammon’s late entry to the select
company is to emphasise that only the suitably prepared may
be admitted to the circle, for ‘a conversation worthy of such
reverence and on such a profound topic would be profaned by
the arrival and presence of many people’.1 Jesus shows similar
concern to protect his teaching: ‘Give not that which is holy to
the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they
trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.’2
   There is another consideration. A conversation is two-way.
What the teacher can say, and from what part of his mind the
instruction comes, is dependent upon the state of the audience.
Hermes points out a number of times the very concentrated
attention and total receptivity required. The presence of this
state is referred to at the beginning of the work: ‘When Ham-
mon had entered the sanctuary, and the fervour of the four men
had filled this holy place, in due silence the minds and hearts of
all hung upon the lips of Hermes, and divine love began to
speak.’ 3 The intimation is that the inner silence and fervour of
the four men were necessary for the revelation of divine love.
   And what is it that divine love reveals? Ultimately that the
apparent multiplicity is in fact a unity. ‘The elements, then, by
which the whole world has been formed are four: fire, water,
earth, air.’ But Hermes also states, ‘The world is one, the soul


                               12
                          Introduction


is one, God is one.’4 This paradox appears a number of times in
different forms throughout the Asclepius. It cannot be unrav-
elled by the ordinary mind, except in a theoretical and
misleading way. The real unravelling takes place only in expe-
rience; or perhaps in the realisation that there is no mystery to
unravel. This experience is not at all like the acquiring of facts
from a book or lecture. The knowledge really comes from within,
but its effect is to show that in reality there is no within and no
without. It is a dramatic, instant transformation of the view-
point from which everything is apprehended and experienced.
There are no boundaries. ‘The knowledge of God’, says Hermes
‘is to be attained by a godlike concentration of consciousness.’ It
‘comes like a rushing river tumbling in flux from above to the
depths beneath’.5


                     Hermetic cosmology

The universe which Hermes presents to us is hierarchical and
governed by the law of the supreme or first God. He is linked to
corporeal matter by a chain of being, yet He himself is also in
every link, and this chain is all ultimately held in love. The
administrator of all things is the Cosmos, described by Hermes
as the second god. Then come the celestial gods, followed by the
daemons, their attendant spirits. From the gods and daemons
‘continual influences are borne throughout the world’.6 The
character and state of every body is determined by these influ-
ences. Human beings come next and then living creatures who
have a soul, after these the vegetable kingdom, beings without
a soul. Finally, there is inert matter.
   The forms of all beings belong to classes (generally referred


                                13
                             Asclepius


to as archetypes in the Translation). The forms have endless
variety, yet each individual is instantly recognisable as belong-
ing to its class. Hermes perhaps suggests that the forms are an
example of the many, and that the class (or archetype) repre-
sents the One. The forms (except for those of the gods) are
mortal, yet the classes are immortal and therefore in a realm
beyond sense.
    Thus the fundamental principle of Hermes’ cosmology is that
the manifest, moving and perishable is governed by the un-
manifest, unmoving and imperishable. Ultimately this is
unmoving consciousness. Hermes says of consciousness that ‘in
its totality, being similar to divinity, } (it) is itself motionless.
Yet it is self-moving within its own stillness. Consciousness is
holy, uncorrupt and eternal and whatever can be named higher
than that, if anything can be.’7
    In discussing eternity and stillness Hermes comes closest to
explaining the enigma of how the supreme God can be both one
and all. He states that time always turns upon itself and thus
always returns to eternity. The idea of turning on itself suggests
the movement of the heavenly bodies which in time always
return to the same positions: they are never out of positions
which they have been in countless times before and in which
they will be countless times again. Thus there is a movement in
eternity which is always within itself. ‘The stillness of eternity
is in movement’. But ‘the movement of time is made still by the
unchanging law which governs its course’.8 The concept is of
absolute stillness existing in the unchanging law which itself
arises in the divine consciousness and is inseparable from it. Of
this Hermes writes, ‘such then is the nature of this being:
imperceptible, unlimited, unthinkable, immeasurable’.9


                                14
                          Introduction



                 The Hermetic view of Man

However, the main focus of the Asclepius is Man. Hermes
describes him as the second image of the Supreme, and the
third god. Although as a class Man is placed below the daemons
(spirits), through the power of association he has the potential
to become whatever he associates with: any entity from God to
matter. A man becomes similar to those with whom he lives.
   Divine consciousness reaches down to human beings and is
accessible to them through the power of attention. Before he
begins an exposition of the threefold deity and the nature of
Man, Hermes asks Asclepius to listen ‘not only with keen
attention, but with liveliness of mind’.10 Before describing to his
disciples how everything in the cosmos is interconnected, he
warns, ‘If you do not hear the words of the speaker with atten-
tive obedience the discourse will fly over you and flow round
you, or rather, it will flow back and mingle again with the
waters of its own source.’11 As always, it is the state of the
student which determines the power of the master.
   Access to divine consciousness gives human beings enormous
power. Early in the work Hermes bursts into praise of Man, for
Hermes has discovered Man’s potential in himself. ‘Man is a
great miracle, a being to be adored and honoured. He passes
into the nature of God as though he were God }.’12 Praise in
Hermes is a key element in transformation, a transformation
which the discourse is intended to bring about.
   Man has been made partly of divine substance and partly of
matter. The true man ‘views with contempt that part of nature
in himself which is human since he has put his entire trust in
the divinity of the other part.’13 Unchanging spirit is the only


                                15
                            Asclepius


ultimate reality for Hermes. It is the divine part of human
beings that enables those who have found access to it to fulfil
the first role for which Man was brought forth: to contemplate
and reverence God. A god without worship is a god without
power. St Matthew tells us (13, 56) that even Jesus could not do
many mighty works in his own country because the people
lacked faith in him.
   Man’s second role, not in reality different from the first, is to
care for creation. He loves the creation just as he is beloved by
the gods. Hermes emphasises Man’s duty to the planet with a
force of which there is a strong resonance today. He makes the
point that to fulfil this obligation Man needs the physical body
which he has been given. The body does not therefore imprison
the human being, as in Plato, but rather exalts him. He has
been placed according to Hermes in ‘the fortunate middle posi-
tion’, a position which makes Man superior to the gods. But the
position brings a danger. Because of their double nature human
beings can identify with the divine, but equally through their
physical body they can associate with matter and therefore sink
to lower forms. They have free choice, which is the essence of
their stature. They are bound to the consequences of that choice
by the unchanging law. If ‘we have completed our term of
service, discharged our worldly duties and have been freed from
the bonds of mortality, God (will) restore us to our higher, that
is divine nature, free from blemish and inviolable’.14 As in Plato
the divine part of the soul is immortal.
   Why should we make any other choice? This question seems
to be in Asclepius’ mind when he asks, ‘Why has God permitted
evil to be brought into the world?’ Hermes explains that it is
because ‘the imperfections of matter’ are ‘mixed within bodies,


                                16
                          Introduction


together with other imperfections derived from the food and
nourishment which we take through necessity, as do all living
beings. It is therefore inevitable that the desires arising from
greed and other vices of the mind steal into human souls.’15 This
greed takes the form of desire for possessions. These are alien
to the parts of Man which have kinship with the divine. ‘Thus
we must despise not only those things we grasp at, but also the
very source within us from which the grasping comes.’16 The
grasping comes from a man’s corporeal nature which is never-
theless essential to his function in the cosmos. But if he seizes
parts of the creation for himself he begins to associate with his
corporeal nature and to forget the divine. As in Plato’s Phaedrus
(248) the soul which is unable to follow the gods ‘sinks beneath
the double load of forgetfulness and vice’.
   It would require a major change in the emotional state of the
disciple to reverse this process, but this is, perhaps, what is
about to happen. God, says Hermes, gave us the best defence
against the insidious enemy, ‘When he deigned to bestow on
the minds of men consciousness, knowledge and intelligence }
by these alone we can avoid the deceits of evil, trickery and
vice.’17 However, if we use these gifts selfishly, we suffer the
consequence.
   There is a day of judgement, as in Plato (Republic 10, 614).
Hermes writes, ‘When the soul has departed from the body it
will come under the power of a most potent spirit who will
examine its merits and judge it. When that spirit has discerned
that the soul is pious and just, he permits it to remain in the
region which it merits. But if he sees it covered with the stains
of crime and oblivious of its vices he hurls it from the heights to
the depths, delivering it to storms and whirlwinds, to the ever


                                17
                           Asclepius


contending elements of air, fire and water so that it is caught
between heaven and earth, continually buffeted in different
directions by the turbulence of the world.’18 If humans do not
choose to come under the finer laws voluntarily, they come
under the laws pertaining to matter which are governed by the
three ineluctable forces of destiny, necessity and order. Immor-
tality, says Hermes, then becomes a burden. The oldest
recorded version of the Day of Judgement is an illustrated
‘Spell’ (125) in the Egyptian Book of the Dead (c. fourteenth
century BC). It is curiously appropriate as it is Thoth who seems
to be officiating and recording the result of the heart being
weighed against the feather of truth (Fig. 1).
   What is deplorable for Hermes is that education, instead
of freeing the mind, helps to enthral it. Philosophy, he says,
has become mingled with other subjects, for instance music,
arithmetic and geometry, which has made it difficult to un-
derstand. Pure philosophy should attend to these other
subjects just sufficiently to marvel at the knowledge that the
heavenly bodies return regularly to the same predetermined
positions, and to ‘revere and praise the divine artistry and
intelligence’. In Hermetic writing praise can lead directly to
second birth. The proper study of music can reveal the One
through the many. ‘To understand music is to comprehend
the arrangement of all things which is determined by divine
proportion. By this proportion which comes from the supreme
artist the arrangement of all individual things is transmuted
into one.’19




                               18
                          Introduction




                      The cycles of time

There was a strong awareness in ancient Egypt of the cyclical
nature of time, an idea that is also present in Hesiod, Plato and
Synesius. It is well reflected in the Asclepius. Each cycle started
with a creative impulse which needed to be renewed, and


                                19
                            Asclepius


human participation was part of this cosmic event. The daily
temple rituals accompanied the sun’s rising and journey across
the sky with all its perils, and worked to ensure that this was
successfully accomplished. The New Year festival brought in
the inundation on which the whole population depended. There
were longer cycles too. The timing of all these festivals had deep
significance for the re-alignment of society to Maat (the concept
of justice and order).20


                      Hermes’ prophecy

There is a prophecy in the Aesclepius which suggests that over
a long cycle the departure from Maat had been very extensive.
The memory of the function of Man had been lost. This had a
grave effect not only on mankind but on nature.

  The gods will withdraw from earth to heaven }. Foreign-
  ers pouring into the land will neglect religion }. Duties to
  the gods and divine worship will be prohibited with penal-
  ties }. This holy land will be filled with sepulchres and
  the dead } only stories of your religion will survive, and
  these your children will not believe }. Egypt will become
  a desert } an example of the most ferocious cruelty } the
  fruits of the earth will wither and the land will no longer
  be fertile. The very air will hang heavy in lifeless torpor
  }. Such will be the old age of the world: irreligion, disor-
  der and unreason concerning all that is good.21

To understand the gravity of this one needs to consider further
the Hermetic vision of the cosmos. It was based on a system of
reflections. As has been said in the Emerald Tablet, attributed


                               20
                          Introduction


to Hermes, it is written, ‘As above, so below.’ The cosmos is the
visible image of the Supreme. Man, also an image of the Su-
preme, has the function to reverence and care for the creation.
Egypt had a special place within it. It was the ‘the image of
heaven’, ‘the temple of the whole cosmos’. It was particularly
shocking that the inhabitants of this favoured land should
forget their sacred trust.
    There had been, perhaps, another insidious departure from
Maat. This is described by Hermes as the creation of ‘terrestrial
gods’. He writes, ‘Because our sceptical ancestors erred greatly
in their opinion of the gods and gave no attention to worship and
divine religion, they invented an art by which they could create
gods.’ The essence of this art was to make statues which were
then enlivened by persuading spirits to dwell therein by sacred
and divine rites. The statues could do harm, but also bring great
benefits to men. ‘These gods of ours help us as though they were
loving parents: either they attend to particular matters, or they
foretell the future through lot and divination, or they provide
certain things, and by these means they come to help human
beings, each in his own way.’22 These terrestrial gods could also
be regarded as a further example of the reflection of heaven on
earth.
    Why then does Hermes say, ‘our sceptical ancestors erred
greatly’? This seeming contradiction is not easy to resolve. But
it does seem that the practice of enlivening statues is associated
with ‘giving no attention to worship and divine religion’: in
other words, neglecting the primary role of mankind. The bene-
fits conferred by the terrestrial gods do not directly assist this
function. The ancestors of Hermes and his disciples had appar-
ently devised a method of obtaining the blessings of terrestrial


                               21
                            Asclepius


gods, while not attending to their own responsibilities by ignor-
ing the worship of the heavenly gods. In a way they had become
prisoners of their own creation. These terrestrial gods could
become angry and might need to be propitiated.
   Hermes’ prophecy is indeed dire, and yet is unusually accu-
rate in specific detail. One may be filled with awe when one
considers the fate of Egypt and the Egyptians, and compares it
with the rich legacy of Greece and Rome which the West has
inherited. The very race has disappeared. We see every day
Celtic, Roman and Saxon types, but in Egypt one looks in vain
for that reddish skin, the heads elongated to the rear, the
almond eyes and full lips (see Fig. 2). Indeed the true successors
to the Ancient Egyptians are to be found amongst those who
have a strong affinity with their spirit.
   It was not until the early nineteenth century that Egyptian
hieroglyphics could be deciphered, and then only because of the
discovery of the Rosetta Stone.23 Many explanations are given
of Egyptian architecture and yet the purpose and significance
of the three great pyramids of Giza remain a mystery. Were
they tombs? But there are no sarcophagi or original inscrip-
tions. Egyptological tradition tells us that the Egyptians were
a people obsessed with death and that this is the subject of their
art. Yet more recent views explain that their theme was primar-
ily life.24 A great religion has been reduced to a series of
children’s stories. All this marks the oblivion of race, language
and culture.
   But when did this happen? Most scholars agree that the
Corpus Hermeticum and Asclepius were composed between 100
and 300 AD. However, nothing of such a cataclysmic nature had
happened to Egypt or even threatened to happen by the end of


                               22
                          Introduction




the third century. Although there were many ancient predic-
tions of coming disasters, this one seems surprisingly accurate
in detail.
   However, from these scenes of death and destruction springs
renewal; the perfect order of Maat will be restored. ‘Then the
lord and father who is first in power and governor under God
who is the One, will consider the conduct and wilful deeds of
men } he will take a stand against these evils }. Either he will
dissolve all this in a flood, or consume it by fire }. Finally, he


                               23
                           Asclepius


will restore the world to its ancient beauty. By these events the
world will be reborn.’25
   What was such a time like? The tradition is recorded in
Manetho that for many years the country was ruled by heavenly
gods.26 In later times the pharaohs were presented as gods who
had taken human form. But such divine men were not re-
stricted to a pharaonic role. Men walked the earth who had
become gods not by the report of others but by their own study
and discipline. A man of such stature, who had wholly identified
with the god Thoth, may have been the reputed author of the
Asclepius which, unlike the Corpus Hermeticum, reads as
though written by a single person.


                            Hermes

Hermes was the title that the ancient Greeks gave to the
Egyptian god Thoth, for the attributes assigned to Thoth by the
Egyptians seemed to be similar to those assigned to Hermes by
the Greeks (and to Mercury by the Romans).
   His symbol in Egypt was the ibis, a bird which was found in
large numbers on the Nile in ancient times. The ibis was a
fitting bird to represent Hermes, since it has a long pointed
beak, appropriate for the god who invented writing and letters.
According to Plato, when Theuth (Thoth) offered the gift of
reading and writing to King Thamus (Ammon), the King was
displeased because he said it would weaken the memory of his
subjects.27 Thoth and Hermes were also associated with number
and counting, and they carried messages and prayers to the
gods and guidance from the gods to men. The Egyptian god
Thoth (though not the Greek Hermes) was also considered to


                               24
                           Introduction


have been the voice of Ra (the Supreme) and to have spoken the
creation into existence. A man who had fully realised the quali-
ties of Thoth in himself was thus well qualified to discourse on
the nature of God, the Cosmos and Man.


                    Hermes Trismegistus

The first mention of Hermes with the triple appellation of great
(‘greatest and greatest and great’) is in a record of a meeting of
the council of the ibis cult in Hermopolis in 172 BC.28 Cicero, Ovid
and Apuleius knew of him. The latter was formerly credited with
the translation of the Greek text of Asclepius into Latin.
   Writing to Porphyry in the third century AD, the Neoplaton-
ist Iamblichus showed great respect to Hermes. Under the
assumed Egyptian name of Abamon, Iamblichus writes: ‘It is to
him that our ancestors in particular dedicated the fruits of their
wisdom, attributing all their own writing to Hermes. And if we,
for our part, receive from this god our due share of favour you,
for your part, do well in laying before the priests questions
about theology.’ Emma Clarke explains: ‘The exact identity of
Hermes named here is deliberately ambiguous. “Abamon” ex-
ploits the supposed attribute of both the Greek Hermes and the
(semi-)divine Hermes Trismegistus, a late antique amalgam of
Thoth and Hermes.’29


                   Hermetics and Gnostics

Christianity in the first and second centuries AD was permeated
by the views of the Gnostic sects, for these sects found it easy to
convert to Christianity. The Gnostics, like the Hermetic cult,


                                25
                            Asclepius


arose in Egypt, although there was also a rather different form
of Gnosticism which spread from Persia and Syria. There are
some striking similarities between Gnostic and Hermetic beliefs.
The Gnostics derived their name from their view of knowledge.
This was not something that was to be learnt from a book, or
heard from another person, but it was received through
‘gnosis’:30 an inward experience of revelation, a sudden illumi-
nation. The effect was not dissimilar from that described by
Hermes on p. 13. It is also significant that the examples of
second birth given in the Corpus Hermeticum accord in spirit
with gnosis. One example is the description in Corpus,13, ‘O
father, I have been made steadfast through God; I see not with
the eyes, but by the operation of spiritual energy in the powers.
I am in heaven, in earth, in water, in air; I am in living creatures
and in plants; I am in the womb, before the womb, after the
womb. I am present everywhere.’ There are Gnostic texts which
express a very similar enlightenment, for instance the anony-
mous author of The Thunder: Perfect Mind writes ‘I am the first
and the last. I am the honoured one and the scorned one. I am
the whore and the holy one. I am the wife and the virgin.’31
   Apart from the similarity between the concept of gnosis and
that of ‘second birth’, as used in the Corpus, there is a similarity
in the way concepts, even Platonic ones, are expressed and a
similarity in the use of idiom and figure. For instance, the word
pleroma has a special significance, both in the Gnostic writings
and in the Hermetic. The classical meanings of the word centre
round ‘completeness’ and ‘fullness’. St Paul extends the defini-
tion of the word to describe the full and perfect nature.32 But to
the Gnostics it conveyed the sense of the ‘abode of the Almighty’.
The word is used in this sense in Corpus Hermeticum,16,3,


                                26
                         Introduction


where Hermes describes the pleroma as being the One and in
the One.
   Aion is another word which carried a meaning peculiar to
Hermetists and Gnostics alike. In Classical Greek it meant ‘a
long time’, ‘everlasting time’, ‘eternity’. In Hermetic and Gnos-
tic writing it also meant ‘absolute’, the ‘supreme deity’.
   The word ‘drunkenness’ acquired the non-classical meaning
of being so immersed in worldly affairs that the words of Truth
cannot be heard. Jesus says in the Gnostic Gospel of Thomas, ‘I
found them all drunk; I found none of them athirst.’33 Hermes
enquires, ‘Whither are you being carried, O men, drunk as you
are, having swallowed neat the word of ignorance?’34
   If there was a mingling of the two traditions it seems more
likely that the Hermetic writings influenced the Gnostic than
vice versa, since there seems to be hardly any awareness of
Christianity in the Hermetic writing. This is true even in the
prophecy of Egypt’s destruction, which might have allowed
an opportunity for it without disturbing the ancient Egyptian
setting. On the other hand the Gnostic Christians do seem to
have used Hermetic texts for devotional purposes. This is
emphasised by their inclusion in the Nag Hammadi Library.
The great majority of these texts are written in Coptic from
a Judaeo-Christian standpoint. The inclusion of four Her-
metic works in a collection of Gnostic devotional literature is
an indication that Hermetic literature was considered an
integral part of Gnostic study or devotion. This view is rein-
forced by the fact that one of these pieces is a note from the
scribe to the recipient saying that he has many more Her-
metic texts but has not included them because he believed
that his recipient already had them.35 The circulation of


                               27
                           Asclepius


Hermetic texts amongst the early Christians may well have
been much greater than has been generally recognised.
   In considering the question of Hermetic influence on Gnosti-
cism, attention should be given to the dating of texts. The
approximate dates usually accepted for the composition of the
philosophic Hermetica are 100-300 AD. It is also thought that
the Greek original of the Asclepius was written towards the end
of that period, although the grounds for this are by no means
firm. Copenhaver indicates evidence from the texts that Her-
metic collections of some kind circulated as early as the second
or third centuries. J.P. Mahé points out that the material on
which individual treatises are based may come from the first
century AD or even earlier.36 Clement of Alexandria, writing in
the first half of the third century, claims knowledge of 42
Hermetic books (Stromata 1, 15). Bearing in mind the extreme
difficulty of establishing dates for these works, chronology
alone does not rule out Hermetic influence on the Gnostics
during the first two centuries of the Christian era.
   The nature of the Hermetic texts is also significant. One of
these is the Discourse on the Eighth and Ninth (Spheres) which
contains a passage describing gnosis or second birth. This
gnosis, as is usual in the Hermetica, is accompanied by a hymn
of praise. The discourse is followed by another piece which
consists of a hymn of praise probably connected to the Dis-
course.37 It contains these words, ‘We rejoice because while we
were in the body you made us divine through your knowledge.’
In other words, these two texts contain the essence of both
Gnosticism and Hermeticism: union with the Supreme while
still in the body, an event which was characteristically accom-
panied by praise.


                              28
                           Introduction


    Although the Gnostic sects held widely different views from
each other, there was nevertheless a core of beliefs which was
common to most, and much of this core, shorn of its Christian
clothing, is found in the Hermetica. The essential gnosis was
the oneness of the Supreme. This signified more than what is
generally meant by monotheism in the Judaic or Christian
traditions. God in his aspect of Father did not make the cosmos.
He is the cosmos and there is nothing else. This statement of
absolute unity is made at the opening of the Asclepius and also
in Gnostic literature. Jesus says in the Gospel of Thomas (the
best known of the Nag Hammadi texts), ‘When you make the
two one, and you make the inner as the outer and the outer as
the inner, so that you will make the male and the female into a
single one }. Then shall you enter the Kingdom.’38 Here Jesus
is not just proclaiming a fact; he is pointing to a profound
spiritual realisation to be attained through gnosis.
    What then of the apparent plurality? As you approach it, it
is seen not to exist. ‘Where you see birth there you see delusion,’
says Hermes.39 The Nag Hammadi Treatise on the Resurrection
says of the Resurrection: ‘it is no illusion, but it is truth! Indeed
it is more fitting to say that the world is an illusion.’ Hermetists,
like the Gnostics, considered only spirit to be real.
    The references to making the male and the female one in the
Gospel of Thomas are particularly significant because there is
distinctive emphasis in the Gnostic tradition on the importance
of women. The sense that each sex contained the powers of the
other goes back to Ancient Egypt (see Fig. 3). Hermes has an
allegorical passage on how men and women exchange qualities
in the sexual act, and it is particularly pointed out in the Corpus
that Man in truth is beyond gender.40


                                29
Asclepius




   30
                         Introduction


   The human being who has understood that both genders are
within, has realised the common archetype to them both. ‘I am
the Father, I am the mother, I am the son,’ exclaims a divine
being in the Apocryphon of John.41 Such beings contain the
creation within them. They are the All. In the Gospel of Thomas
Jesus says, ‘But the kingdom is in your centre and it is about
you.’42 Hermes has come to the same realisation when he de-
clares, ‘But you are whatsoever I am; you are whatever I do; you
are whatever I speak. You are all things and there is nothing
else.’43 How then does apparent evil enter the world and what
is its cause? The root cause is ignorance. It is the ignorance
leading to desire for possessions that has to be removed. As has
already been mentioned, God has equipped men with conscious-
ness, knowledge and intelligence for this purpose.44
   In the Corpus Hermes gives an allegorical account of Man
wishing to create and receiving the assent, though not the
command, of the Supreme. He does create; but seeing his reflec-
tion in Nature, mistakes it for himself and uniting with Nature
in love falls into all manner of suffering. In Poimandres (the
title of the first book in the Corpus) the Nous of the supreme
rescues the soul from such ignorance.
   The accounts of the origin of evil by the Gnostic leaders
Basilides and Valentinus are quite similar in imagery. The man
becomes possessed by evil entities, but it is he himself who has
led his desire towards evil. Like Hermes, Valentinus supposes
that the lower soul, without the will of her father and without
having realised her divine nature, plunged into forbidden terri-
tory in order to know her father. She is rescued by the saviour
who healed her passions and separated them from her by
bestowing gnosis.45 The inner meaning of these myths is the


                              31
                            Asclepius


same: gnosis of the nature of one’s real self is the only antidote
to evil.
    It must have been plain to Gnostics and Hermetists alike
that most human beings do not fulfil their potential in this life.
It must also have been clear that while some humans appear to
make little spiritual progress during their life upon earth,
others make much progress very quickly. To the Gnostics and
Hermetists the presumption was that such souls had been
previously embodied, and during that embodiment spiritual
development had taken place. The fact that some babies were
born deformed led some to think they were suffering the conse-
quences of injustices that they had committed in a previous
life-time (the voicing of which opinion once cost an England
football manager his job).
    From the beginning of the second century AD Gnosticism
came under the attack of the Orthodox Church. Perhaps this
was partly because the orthodox party felt that, under the
threat of persecution, a tighter organisation and definition of
fundamental Christian beliefs needed to be made. The Church
also felt the need for a single literal text that everyone, even the
uneducated, could understand. The fear was that several levels
of meaning in the Scriptures would lead to confusion and to
individuals interpreting them in their own ways. But the Gnos-
tics, like the Hermetists, much favoured allegory, and they
began to feel themselves excluded from the orthodox body of the
Church. Allegorical interpretation of the scriptures did not die
even in the Orthodox Church. St Augustine in particular com-
mends it. With approval he quotes St Ambrose as saying, ‘the
letter killeth but the spirit quickeneth’. He goes on to explain
how if certain passages were taken literally they might lead a


                                32
                           Introduction


man to ‘perverse belief’, but when spiritually opened by Am-
brose the ‘mystical veil’ for him had been removed from such
texts.46 Probably later, he insists (unlike some Gnostic writers)
that everything written in the scriptures must be literally true.
But he writes of certain passages, ‘I view them with greater
delight under that (figurative) aspect than if no such figure
were drawn from the sacred books, though the fact would
remain the same and the knowledge the same.’47 The allegorical
interpretation of the Scriptures also persisted in the Desert
fathers and eventually in the monastic tradition, which later
sprang from that earlier one. This method of interpreting the
Scriptures eventually gave birth to the fourfold sense fully
adopted in the Middle Ages, and formulated in particular by St
Thomas Aquinas.48
   ‘Hermes’ in the Asclepius seems to foreshadow different
levels of comprehending truth when he writes of intelligence
and consciousness. ‘Now the intelligence of human conscious-
ness } consists totally in the memory of past events }. But the
intelligence of Nature can be attained through the capacity of
cosmic consciousness from everything which is subject to the
senses in the world. The consciousness of Eternity, which comes
next, has also been bestowed and its quality made known by the
sensory world. But the intelligence and quality of the conscious-
ness belonging to the Supreme God is truth alone.’49
   The four senses of which St Thomas Aquinas speaks are
literal or historic, allegorical, tropological (moral), and anagogi-
cal. He says of the last: insofar as things ‘signify what is
involved in eternal glory, we have the anagogical sense’. This
seems to come close to Hermes’ description of ‘the consciousness
belonging to the Supreme God’: truth alone. There is also a


                                33
                            Asclepius


connection between the literal or historic level and Hermes’
view that ‘the intelligence of human consciousness is totally in
the memory of past events’.
   Nevertheless, despite the continuance of this tradition in the
Orthodox Church, at least from the early years of the second
century the Church claimed to be the sole mediator of the
meaning of scripture and even of Christ. This claim elimi-
nated all direct mystical experience of truth. Thus there was
a conflict between ‘membership’ of the Church and direct
knowledge or gnosis.50
   The orthodox party based its position on four bulwarks:
acceptance of the authority of only those books which became
canonical; acceptance of the authority of the Old Testament;
total obedience to the bishop; belief in a literal interpretation of
the New Testament. By the end of the second century Gnostics
had been virtually expelled from the Church.
   In the tradition of the early Church, deep religious experi-
ence arises from within and constitutes the real spiritual life.
Obedience to laws, bishops, and councils, and verbal declara-
tions of belief might or might not assist that life, but they could
never be a substitute for it. Gnosis was the true knowledge; the
rest was just information, right or wrong.
   A light went out of the Church with the departure of the
Gnostics, and with the take-over by Constantine and his succes-
sors the darkness deepened. But the fire of the spirit can never
be extinguished and the centre of spiritual practice, the essence
of Gnosticism, retreated to the monasteries and hermitages of
Egypt, and later of Europe.
   The influence of Hermes lived on. Two Church Fathers had
a good deal to say about him but held very different views. St


                                34
                          Introduction


Augustine tells us that Hermes lived in the time of Moses and
was responsible for writing the Asclepius.51 However,
Augustine condemned him as an idolator. Lactantius saw him
as an inspired seer who, long before the Christian era, had
correctly written about the one God, the Word and the creation.
These two opposing views were taken up by later writers in the
Middle Ages. It was that of Lactantius which prevailed.


          Hermes in the Middle East and Spain

The Hermetic works aroused considerable interest among the
Arabic scholars in the early Middle Ages, an account of which is
contained in Brian Copenhaver’s introduction to his Hermetica
(xlv-xlvii) and also in Walter Scott’s Hermetica (1,97-111). Ac-
cording to Scott, Hermeticism together with Greek paganism
(albeit modified by Syriac and Mithraic influences) survived in
Harran, a city of Northern Mesopotamia. In order to be accepted
by the Muslim authorities the inhabitants took the name of
Sabian, the name of one of the books whose followers were
exempted from persecution by the Koran.
   Harran produced a number of scholars. The greatest was
Thabit ibn Qurrah, who was much influenced by Neoplatonism
as well as by the Hermetica. Scott considered it possible that
when growing persecution extinguished ‘Harranianism’ in its
original city (c. 1050) some of its followers might have rekindled
Hermeticism in Byzantium during the eleventh century, in the
time of the scholar Psellus. If this were true, and it is only a
surmise, it would be an example of Arabic scholars rekindling
knowledge and enthusiasm among Westerners for their own
tradition.


                               35
                           Asclepius


   There is a clearer example of Arabic culture assimilating
Hermetic ideas which later returned to the West and kindled
new interest there. Toledo was a focal point in Europe for the
translation of works from Arabic into Latin and vernacular
languages. These were undertaken in the reign of Alphonso X,
King of Castile (1252-1284), known as The Wise, who commis-
sioned the translation of a great many works, collected into
three large miscellanies. These covered respectively magic, as-
tronomy and astrology. Evelyn Procter says of the first of these,
‘No date is given and the King is not mentioned, but the
manuscript has all the characteristics of a royal manuscript,
and the contents appear to correspond to part of the Latin
Liber Picatrix, which has survived in manuscripts of the
fifteenth century and later, and which is stated to be based
on a vernacular translation made at Alfonso’s command in
1256.’52 According to Frances Yates, ‘Though the authorship
of Picatrix is not assigned to Hermes Trismegistus, the work
mentions him with great respect, and it is important because
it may have been one of Ficino’s authorities on talismans and
sympathetic magic.’53
   Although the Picatrix is primarily a book on magic, it has a
philosophical setting which is both Hermetic and Ficinian. The
Picatrix, like the Asclepius, begins with intimations that pro-
found secrets are to be revealed. The truth is One: ‘all things
come from it, and through it receive truth and unity in the
perpetual movement of generation and corruption. There is a
hierarchy in things, and lower things are raised to higher
things. Man is a little world reflecting the great world of the
Cosmos, but through his intellect the wise man can raise him-
self above the seven heavens.’54 Through the medium of


                               36
                          Introduction


astrology and theurgy in the Picatrix many would have learnt
the principles of Plato and Hermes. Perhaps the true magic of
Trismegistus was to combine these subjects with philosophy (a
practice he condemns).


                Hermes in the Middle Ages:
                France, Germany and Italy

It may seem strange to introduce an account of Hermes in the
Middle Ages with Dionysius (known as pseudo-Dionysius) since
he was an anonymous monk born in the sixth century, who
wrote his work under the name of Dionysius the Areopagite, the
Greek who was converted by St Paul during his visit to Ath-
ens.55 Yet because of the intensity of his writing and the fact
that until the late Renaissance his work was believed to have
been that of the Areopagite, he was responsible for bringing into
Christianity ideas emanating from Plato and Hermes.
   He takes up Hermes’ proposition that ‘either all things are of
one, or they are one’. Therefore, like Hermes, he maintains that
either God should have all names or no name. But he develops
this statement into spiritual practices. The first of these is the
Way of Affirmation. The second is the Way of Negation.56 But
they are to be pursued differently: ‘When we made assertions
we began with the first things, moved down through intermedi-
ate terms, until we reached the last things. But now as we climb
from the last things up to the most primary we deny all things.’
The second exercise succeeds the first. What do we experience
on this journey? ‘The more we take flight upward, the more our
words are confined to the ideas we are capable of forming: so
that now as we plunge into that darkness which is beyond


                               37
                            Asclepius


intellect, we shall find ourselves not simply running short of
words but actually speechless and unknowing.’57
   These words might have been taken from The Cloud of
Unknowing, composed many centuries later. Like Hermes,
Dionysius describes the cosmos as governed by a hierarchy, but
Dionysius is more orderly and precise in his enumeration and
description of the heavenly host. It is grouped into three orders
of three: Seraphim (burns what separates man from God),
Cherubim (fullness of knowledge), Thrones (established in di-
vine service); Dominions (order and justice), Virtues (bestow
grace and valour), Powers (overcome fetters to the earth); Prin-
cipalities (Divine Lordship and service), Archangels (imprint on
everything the divine seal and impart to the soul spiritual
light), Angels (minister to all men and Nature, purifying and
uplifting them).
   Through the ministry of these orders the divine life is trans-
mitted from its ultimate source to all things. These orders thus
have an inner relationship with every human soul. Through
them it may become liberated from material bondage and attain
to the fullness of divine likeness.58 The divine ray constantly
flows into us, yet it can never be deprived of its unity. Dionysius’
treatment thus illustrates Hermes’ statement that ‘Either all
things are of one or they are one. The two propositions are so
linked that it is impossible to separate one from the other.’ It
also shows, as in Hermes, how the creation is a great chain
of being, sustained by love and perpetually renewed by the
Absolute.
   In The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy Dionysius again strongly
echoes Hermes in maintaining that the order upon earth re-
flects the order above. For the three primary orders are


                                38
                          Introduction


reflected in the three ecclesiastical orders: bishops, priests and
deacons.
   In the twelfth-century Renaissance the reputation of Hermes
was high, Abelard and Alain of Lille both thought Hermes a
man of great wisdom, for his reputation as a magician did not
damage his name as a philosopher. This was in spite of the fact
that many magical texts attributed to Hermes had begun to
appear. There were serious attacks upon him as an idolator in
the early thirteenth century. But both Roger Bacon and Albert
the Great praised him as a philosopher, in spite of the magical
works attributed to him.59
   Although Meister Eckhart (1260-1307) does not mention
Hermes or his two philosophical works by name, he does men-
tion a book attributed to him: The Twenty-four Philosophers.60
Eckhart’s biographer writes that ‘his entrance into the Domini-
can Order guaranteed him an immensely privileged education
and access to the finest libraries. There is little philosphical or
theological material extant which we can assume Meister Eck-
hart did not read.’61 In any event his views and inspiration are
very similar to those of Hermes. The One, he says, is every-
where present since all exists only by reference to it. ‘Those who
are rightly disposed } intend God alone, and all things become
God for them.’ God and the soul, in its essence, are one.
   An interest in the Hermetic writings runs through all the
works of Nicholas of Cusa from Sermo 1 (1430) to De ludo globi
(1463): the knowledge of the divine Word, the doctrine of divine
names, and the concept of matter, world and man are taken
from the Asclepius. Illustrative of his interest are the numerous
glosses in Nicholas’ own hand, found in the margins of the most
ancient manuscript of the Asclepius. While Nicholas has to


                                39
                            Asclepius


condemn the Hermetic passages on enlivening statues in De
pace fidei he absolves Hermes of any accusation of idolatory in
de docta ignorantia.62 On a voyage from Byzantium to Italy
Nicholas of Cusa had the ‘intuition of opposites’. God is above
all opposites and unites in himself statements that are incom-
patible in the finite world. This Hermetic principle became the
central theme of Cusa’s thought. All affirmation about God,
such as being and non-being, encompassing all beings, and
being contained in all beings is merely partial. It has to be
completed by the contrary affirmation, because God unites in
Himself that which is incompatible in the finite. God is nowhere
in the world, while being everywhere in it.63 Hermes and
Dionysius will be recognised at once in the formulation of this
paradox.


                       The Renaissance

In Renaissance times the profundity of Hermes’ philosophy
made a strong appeal to Marsilio Ficino, the great Florentine
philosopher who revived the teaching of Plato in the West as a
direct source of spiritual illumination. He was able to do this by
building on the information supplied by St Augustine in the
City of God, an ironical circumstance since Augustine reserves
for Hermes some of his most severe strictures.
   Not only did Hermes live in the time of Moses, but he was the
first in a chain of philosophers which was directly linked to
Moses. Ficino bases this concept of a chain on Artapanus,64 the
second century BC Jewish writer. The chain that Ficino de-
scribes was a teacher/disciple relationship: it began with
Hermes Trismegistus and was completed with Plato. The impli-


                               40
                          Introduction


cation of this was that the teaching of Plato, and his school, was
based upon Moses, just as was the authority of the Hebrew
prophets through whose inspiration the coming of Christ was
foretold. This made the stature of Hermes and his successors
comparable to that of those prophets, well above anything that
they had enjoyed even in the Middle Ages.
   In 1462 Cosimo de’ Medici, the effective ruler of Florence, set
Marsilio up in a small villa, close to his own at Careggi, now a
suburb of Florence. Ficino was given the task of producing a
Latin translation of Plato’s works, in which Cosimo was keenly
interested. However, shortly after Ficino had settled to his task,
one of Cosimo’s agents had discovered in what is now Bulgaria
the Greek text of the Corpus Hermeticum. Cosimo purchased
the manuscript and had it conveyed to Careggi, where he
instructed Ficino to desist from translating Plato, so beloved by
the great ruler, and to translate Hermes first. Such was the
veneration in which he held Hermes. Ficino’s close connection
with the Asclepius is perhaps suggested by the fact that a Latin
version is erroneously included in his Opera Omnia printed in
Basle in 1576. Pico della Mirandola’s essay, ‘On the Dignity of
Man’, may be inspired by the encomium in the Asclepius.
   But Hermes’ reputation was not confined to Florence. A
remarkable tribute is the huge depiction of Hermes in mosaic
on the pavement of Siena Cathedral (Fig. 4).
   Almost as great a tribute to his sacred authority are the
series of pictures which Pinturicchio was commissioned to paint
of Hermes and which now decorate the inner papal apartments
in the Vatican. One of these features the goddess Isis appar-
ently instructing Moses on one side of her and Hermes on the
other (Fig. 5).


                               41
                          Asclepius




  In the second half of the sixteenth century scholars began to
doubt the antiquity of the Hermetic texts and finally Isaac
Casaubon, in 1614, convinced most scholars that the texts and
content of the Corpus and Asclepius dated from the Christian
era. This was still the view of Nock and Festugière, who pub-


                              42
Introduction




    43
                            Asclepius


lished an excellent critical edition of the Corpus and Asclepius
shortly after World War II.


                Sources of the Asclepius and
                    Corpus Hermeticum

Scholars have found Stoic and Judaeic influences in the As-
clepius and Corpus Hermeticum, but the genius of Plato shines
through far more strongly. There is his vision of the ineffable
One which though unmanifest to the senses, illumines the true
forms of the virtues. They too then shine with the same light.
What we see in the physical world are only shadows and images
of these forms. Hermes says that no trace of the consciouness of
God can be seen on earth.65 Nevertheless, Man is a divine being
and with philosophical training this intelligible light can be
apprehended by the human mind. In Plato, as in Hermes, the
One is generative. It begets from itself a creator god, the Cos-
mos, from which everything is born. This second god is the
manifest image of the unmanifest.
   Jeremy Naydler points out that the Platonic conception of the
human soul is very different from the earlier Homeric concep-
tion where it is represented as a kind of wraith of the individual
when alive. Plato’s conception is much more akin to that of
Pythagoras where the soul (psuchê) is the inner nature of the
human being. Its essence is immortal and divine.66 It is the
ultimate destiny of this essence to unite with the unmanifest
One. This view of the soul is also that of Hermes.
   Whence did Plato derive his teaching? Every man in one
sense is the source of his own knowledge; yet no one is inde-
pendent of cultural tradition. Plato inherited many of the


                               44
                          Introduction


teachings of the Pythagoreans; and he had ample opportunity
to become acquainted with them during his visits to Italy. But
both Plato and Pythagoras had also visited Egypt and studied
under Egyptian priests.67
    The authority of the ancient biographers for the visits of
Pythagoras and Plato to Egypt has been discounted by many
modern scholars. It is sometimes explained that a visit to Egypt
was a necessary element in the curriculum vitae of a philo-
sopher if his credentials were to be taken seriously, and might
therefore have been added as a polite fiction by an admiring
biographer. If Egypt had had such a reputation it would only
make it the more likely that aspiring philosophers or theologi-
ans would in fact have made this comparatively easy journey.
    As Jeremy Naydler remarks, if Plato had visited Egypt he
would have heard a similar teaching to that which he sets forth
in his dialogues. He would have discovered the prototype of the
Good, the Fair, the One, in Ra, the all-pervading and transcendent
God. He would have discovered his psuchê in the Egyptian Ba, for
it too had wings to fly to the Eternal; and the divine and immortal
part of the soul he would have seen in the Egyptian akh.
    Plato would also have witnessed, and perhaps taken part in,
ceremonies intended to bring about spiritual rebirth in this life.
The climax of the Sed festival, which theoretically celebrated
thirty years of a king’s reign, appears to have been connected
with the reunion of the king with Ra. This festival was certainly
being celebrated at the beginning of the Old Kingdom in the
reign of Zoser (2668-2649 BC). The idea of union with Ra was
still alive in the New Kingdom (1570-1070 BC) and a number of
‘spells’ in the Book of the Dead are witness to this. ‘I am Ra who
is with the gods and I will not perish’ (Spell 8). The essence of


                                45
                           Asclepius


these ceremonies was the total identification of the aspirant
with the deity, such as is expressed in Corpus Hermeticum 5,
11: ‘You are whatsoever I am, you are whatever I do; you are
whatever I speak; you are all things and there is nothing else.’
   The mystery of transformation into the divine after purifica-
tory rites and ceremonies was inherited by the mystery cults of
Greece, with which Plato was familiar (Phaedrus 250). The
concept of transformation in the ‘mysteries’ was later adapted
to the Eucharist of the Christian Church. That tradition is
therefore still alive.
   The essential ideas in Plato that have already been men-
tioned, as well as others, were reflected in the symbolism of
Ancient Egypt. Many of these ideas we are more accustomed to
associate with the East, and with India in particular. Some of
them are in fact extraordinarily ancient and formative to our
civilisation. We may respond to them more easily through our
own tradition than when we receive them through a different
culture. Nowhere do we hear these ideas more concisely or more
powerfully than in the writings attributed to Hermes Trismeg-
istus. Perhaps this is the true legacy of Ancient Egypt.


                         Conclusion

Although belief in the extreme antiquity of these texts had been
demolished by Casaubon, they were still respected by some for
the power of their content. These included Ralph Cudworth, the
Cambridge Platonist, Thomas Taylor, the translator and com-
mentator on the works of Plato, and Ralph Waldo Emerson, the
foremost figure of the New England Transcendentalists, who
wrote ‘The high priesthood of pure reason, the Trismegisti’ are


                              46
                         Introduction


‘expounders of the principles of thought from age to age. When
we turn over their abstruse pages, wonderful seems the calm
and grand air of these few, these great spiritual lords.’ At such
times, he writes, ‘I am present at the sowing of the seed of the
world’.68
   The importance of Hermes Trismegistus is in the end less in
the sources of his teaching than in the guidance he gives to
everyone for the spiritual life. For such guidance does not
change over the millennia. There are passages in Hermes which
may be read in a few seconds and yet contemplated for a
lifetime. The best way to evaluate Hermes is to reflect upon
what he says.




                               47
            Notes to the Introduction

   Full publication details are provided in the Bibliography.



    1. Asclepius, 1.
    2. St Matthew 7:6.
    3. Asclepius, 1.
    4. Ibid., 3.
    5. Ibid.
    6. Ibid.
    7. Ibid., 32.
    8. Ibid., 31.
    9. Ibid.; cf. Corpus Hermeticum, 13,6, and Plato, Parmenides, 137-42.
    10. Asclepius, 10.
    11. Asclepius, 19.
    12. Ibid., 6; cf. Corpus Hermeticum, 5,11; 11,20.
    13. Ibid.
    14. Ibid., 11; cf. Plato, Republic, X, 614-21.
    15. Asclepius, 22.
    16. Ibid., 11.
    17. Ibid., 16.
    18. Ibid., 28.
    19. Asclepius, 13; cf. Plato, Timaeus, 34-6. The proportions of estab-
lished musical scales express this reminder of unity. The exemplar of
these scales is described by Plato when he discusses the formation of
the world soul.
    The subjects touched upon in this paragraph – geometry, arithme-
tic, music and astronomy – were central to the curriculum of Plato’s
Academy and became known as the Quadrivium in the Middle Ages.


                                   48
                     Notes to the Introduction


Together with the Trivium it formed the basis of Western education in
the Middle Ages and beyond.
   20. Jeremy Naydler, Temple of the Cosmos, pp. 91-3 and 147-52. As
well as discussing the celebration of First Time, Naydler also writes
about its reality being beyond the dimension of ordinary time.
   21. Asclepius, 24-6.
   22. Ibid., 37-8.
   23. The Rosetta stone commemorates the benefactions conferred by
Ptolemy V (205-180 BC) in three writing systems: hieroglyphics, demo-
tic and Greek. The inscription is in two languages: Egyptian and
Greek.
   24. Jeremy Naydler, Shamanic Wisdom in the Pyramid Texts,
passim.
   25. Asclepius, 26.
   26. Manetho, History of Egypt, 1,1.
   27. Plato, Phaedrus, 274.
   28. Brian P. Copenhaver, Hermetica, pp. xiv-xv.
   29. Iamblichus, De mysteriis, 1,1, tr. Clarke, Dillon and Hershbelt.
   30. Gnôsis, Greek for knowledge, wisdom.
   31. Nag Hammadi Library, ed. J.M. Robinson, p. 297.
   32. Romans 11:12.
   33. Hugh McGregor Ross, Gospel of Thomas, 28.
   34. Corpus Hermeticum, 7,1.
   35. Nag Hammadi Library, pp. 321-8.
   36. J.P. Mahé, quoted by Copenhaver, xliv.
   37. Nag Hammadi Library, p.329.
   38. Ross, Gospel of Thomas, 22.
   39. Asclepius, 32.
   40. Corpus Hermeticum, 1,15.
   41. Nag Hammadi Library, p. 105.
   42. Ross, Gospel of Thomas, 3.
   43. Corpus Hermeticum, 5, 11.
   44. Asclepius, 16.
   45. Valentinus, Letter quoted in Joseph P. Macchio, Orthodox Sup-
pression of Original Christianity, p. 164.
http://web.archive.org/web/20041010000727/www.essene.com/Church/
Conspiracy/



                                 49
                               Asclepius


   46. St Augustine, Confessions, 6,4.
   47. St Augustine, On Christian Doctrine, II, 6,7-8.
   48. St Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologia, 1,9-10. Also see Angela
Voss, ‘From Allegory to Anagoge: The Question of Symbolic Perception
in a Literal World’, www.skyscript.co.uk/allegory.html.
   49. Asclepius, 32
   50. For this information I am indebted to Dr Joseph Milne.
   51. St Augustine, City of God, 8,23 and 18, 8.
   52. Evelyn Procter, Alfonso X of Castile, 2, p. 10.
   53. Frances Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition, 3,
p. 49.
   54. Ibid., 3, p. 51.
   55. Acts 17:34.
   56. Dionysius, Mystical Theology, 2-3.
   57. Ibid.
   58. Dionysius, Celestial Hierarchy, 3,2.
   59. For the account of Hermes’ reputation in the Middle Ages I am
much indebted to Paolo Lucentini’s excellent article ‘Hermes Trismegis-
tus, II: Middle Ages’, in the Dictionary of Gnosis and Western Esotericism.
   60. For this information I am indebted to Dr Joseph Milne.
   61. Meister Eckhart’s Selected Writings, tr. Oliver Davies, p. xviii.
   62. Lucentini, op. cit.
   63. J.M. Counet, ‘Nicholas of Cusa’, Dictionary of Gnosis and West-
ern Esotericism.
   64. See Yates, op. cit., 2, p. 26.
   65. Aesclepius, 32.
   66. Jeremy Naydler, Plato, Shamanism and Ancient Egypt, pp. 22-5
   67. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata, 1,15. Clement says that
Pythagoras was a disciple of Sonches the Egyptian archprophet and
Plato of Sechnuphis of Heliopolis. Iamblichus and Porphyry also vouch
for Pythagoras’ visit to Egypt and Diogenes Laertius for that of Plato.
Herodotus (book 2) writes that ‘the names of nearly all the gods came
to Greece from Egypt’. In the Timaeus Plato makes an Egyptian priest
say to Solon, ‘O Solon, Solon, you Greeks are all children!’ (Timaeus
22). Egypt was the repository of ancient knowledge.
   68. Ralph Waldo Emerson, Selected Writings of Ralph Waldo Emer-
son, p. 303.



                                   50
                  Translator’s Note

For the text of the Latin the critical edition of D. Nock and A-J.
Festugière has been followed (Les Belles Lettres, Paris, 1992
[1st edn 1946]). Reference has also been made to the most
important of the early manuscripts, Bruxellensis 10054-10056
(early eleventh century).
   The division of the text into numbered sections, although not
in the manuscript, has become conventional in printed editions.
These divisions have been indicated in the translation that
follows by bold numbers in square brackets. I have added
headings to indicate the main subject of the section.
   Some words are difficult to translate, especially where the
Latin word has no exact English equivalent. Mundus, for in-
stance, has generally been translated as ‘cosmos’, but this does
not always convey the best sense. It has sometimes therefore
been translated differently. Where this is so, mundus has been
added after the translation in square brackets. In the Asclepius,
mundus can also mean ‘matter’.
   Similarly, species has a much broader meaning in Latin that
the nearest equivalent word in English. It has been mostly
translated as ‘form’, ‘individual form’ or ‘individual’ as seems in
each case to make the best sense.
   Genus has also been difficult to translate. In the Asclepius it
conveys something more than simply ‘race’, ‘kind’ or ‘class’. It is


                                51
                           Asclepius


associated with generative power and is referred to as ‘immor-
tal’. There is resonance here with the Platonic ‘idea’. The
English word often used in this translation is ‘archetype’, mean-
ing the original pattern from which all copies are produced,
though on some occasions the word ‘class’ has seemed prefer-
able.
   The nearest equivalent in English to the Latin daimon (or
daemon) is ‘spirit’, but this has such a variety of meaning that
in most cases it has been felt better to use ‘daemon’. Occasion-
ally ‘spirit’ has been used where there seems no danger of
confusion.




                               52
                       Translation


                    Teacher and disciples

[1] ‘It is God, yes, God, who has led you to me, O Asclepius, so
that you can take part in a divine discourse. This discourse will
be such that through its love and reverence for God it will
rightly seem to have more divine power than any I have pre-
viously spoken, or rather than any that have been inspired in
me by the divine spirit. If you show yourself able to understand
it your whole mind will be completely filled with all that is good,
that is if there are many good things and not one only in which
all are held. Indeed, one can see that these alternatives are
consistent with each other; either all things are of one, or they
are one. The two propositions are so linked that it is impossible
to separate one from the other. But this you will find out if you
attend carefully to the coming discourse. But now, Asclepius,
you must move forward a little. Call Tat to come and join us.’
    At Tat’s entry Asclepius suggested that Hammon also be
present. Trismegistus said, ‘No ill-will prevents Hammon from
joining us, for I well remember that many of my writings have
been dedicated to him, just as many discourses on natural
philosophy and countless public discourses have been dedicated
to my most loving and beloved son Tat. But on this treatise I
shall inscribe your name. Call no one except Hammon lest a


                                53
                            Asclepius


conversation worthy of such reverence and on such a profound
subject be profaned by the arrival and presence of many people.
For it is the mark of an irreligious mind to bring to the notice of
a crowd of people a discourse that is totally filled with the whole
majesty of the divine spirit.’
   When Hammon had entered the sanctuary, and the fervour
of the four men and the presence of God had filled this holy
place, in due silence the minds and hearts of all hung upon the
lips of Hermes, and divine love began to speak:


                     The One and the All

[2] ‘O Asclepius, every human soul is immortal, but the nature
of their immortality is not the same, for souls differ according
to conduct and time.’
   ‘Why, O Trismegistus? Is not every soul of one quality?’
   ‘O Asclepius, how quickly you have broken from the just
restraint of reason! For did I not say that all things are one and
the one is all, since all these things were in the creator before
he created them? Rightly is he said to be all, whose limbs are
all things. And so, throughout this discourse, take care to be
mindful of him who alone is all, or who is the creator of all.
Everything comes from heaven into earth, into water, into air.
Only fire, which is borne upwards, is life-giving. What moves
downward serves it. Yet what moves down from on high is full
of generative power; what moves upward gives nourishment.
Only earth of all the elements remains within itself and is the
receiver of every kind of form, and what it receives it returns.
   ‘This therefore is the all, as you remember; it is the essence
of the all and it is the all. The soul and the cosmos being


                                54
                          Translation


embraced by Nature are set in movement by her with such
diversity of quality, evident in all images, that countless forms
are known to exist by the contrast of their qualities. Yet these
forms are also united so that all things appear as one whole and
from the one.


             Cosmos, nature and the elements

[3] ‘The elements, then, by which the whole cosmos has been
formed are four: fire, water, earth, air. The cosmos is one, the
soul is one, God is one.
   ‘Now be entirely present, as far as your mind and ability are
capable. For the knowledge of God is to be attained by a godlike
concentration of consciousness. Such knowledge comes like a
rushing river tumbling in flux from above to the depths be-
neath. By its headlong rush it outruns any effort we make as
hearers, or even as teachers.
   ‘Now heaven, the manifest god, directs all bodies, whose
increase and decrease the sun and moon determine. But heaven
and the soul itself, along with all that is in the cosmos are in
turn governed by Him who has created them: this is God.
   ‘From all the heavenly bodies just referred to, of which the
same God is the ruler, continual influences are borne through-
out the cosmos and throughout all ensouled classes and
individual forms, because this is the nature of the cosmos. The
cosmos has been prepared by God as a receptacle for forms of
all kinds. Nature, then, impresses forms on matter by means of
the four elements, and leads all things to heaven so that they
will be pleasing in the sight of God.



                               55
                            Asclepius



            Archetypes* and individual forms

[4] ‘All beings dependent on the world above are divided into
individual forms, as I am going to explain. The forms of all
beings conform to their archetypes so that the archetype is the
whole; the individual is a part of the archetype. Thus the
archetype of gods will create from itself forms of gods; and so
similarly with the archetype of daemons,* of men, of birds and
the archetypes of all things which exist in the cosmos. They will
all generate forms similar to themselves.
    ‘There is another class of living being, a class without soul,
which yet does not lack senses so that it benefits from good
treatment, while it is weakened and injured by bad treatment.
I am speaking of all those things which take life from the health
of their roots in the ground and their shoots; their forms are
scattered throughout the whole earth. Heaven itself is totally
filled by God. But the archetypes of which I have spoken dwell
in the space co-extensive with their forms; and insofar as they
belong to their archetypes the forms are immortal. For the
individual form is part of the archetype, as a man is part of
humankind, so by necessity the individual conforms to the
character of its archetype. But although all these archetypes
are immortal, not all the individual forms are. In the case of the
divine beings both the archetype itself and the individuals are
immortal. For all the other classes immortality lies in the
archetype. Although there is death for individual forms, life is
preserved through the fecundity of reproduction. Thus the indi-
vidual forms are mortal, the archetypes are not: man is mortal,
humankind, immortal.
  * See Translator’s Note on pp. 51-2.


                                56
                          Translation



                         Associations

 [5] ‘However, the individual forms of all classes are mixed with
all other classes; some of these were created early on; others
were created from those which were made previously. Those
which are created by gods, by daemons or by humans are the
forms which bear the greatest similarity to their archetypes. It
is impossible for bodies to be fashioned without the assent of the
gods, or for individual forms to receive their shapes without the
help of daemons, nor can beings without a soul be planted and
cultivated without human beings. When any of the daemons
pass from their own class into another form, and are perhaps
joined to a form of the divine class, they are considered similar
to gods because of their proximity and association. However,
these daemons retain the quality of their own archetype and are
called friends of humankind. The principle is the same with
regard to humans, but it is more far-reaching. For the forms of
humankind are many and are varied. Coming down from asso-
ciation with divine forms, in the way described, they make
many unions with all other forms, and with most of them
through necessity.
    ‘On the same principle someone who, through divinely in-
spired religion, has joined himself to the gods in mind comes
close to the gods. For it is by means of mind that a man becomes
one with the gods, and similarly a man becomes one with the
daemons who attaches himself to them. It follows that those
beings are indeed human who are content with the middle
position of their class, and all other human beings will be
similar to the class belonging to the individuals with whom they
associate.


                               57
                            Asclepius



                        Stature of Man

[6] ‘Thus, O Asclepius, Man is a great miracle, a being to be
adored and honoured. He passes into the nature of God as
though he were God. He understands the race of daemons as he
knows that he originates from the same source. He views with
contempt that part of nature in himself which is human since
he has put his entire trust in the divinity of the other part. How
much happier is the nature of a man when it is tempered by
self-control! He is united to the gods through a common divinity.
He inwardly despises that part of himself by which he is earth-
bound. All other beings, to whom he knows he is necessary
through divine dispensation, he binds to himself in a knot of
love. He raises his sight to heaven while he takes care of the
earth. Thus he is in the fortunate middle position: he loves those
things that are below him and is beloved by the beings above.
He quickly unites with the elements; through the sharpness of
his mind he plumbs the depths of the sea. All things are open
to him. The heavens do not seem too high, for he measures them
by the skill of his mind as though he were very close to them.
Foggy air never disturbs the direction of his attention; the dense
earth is no obstacle to his work; no depth of water, however
great, impairs his view. He is all things and he is the same
everywhere.
   ‘Of all kinds of beings those which are endowed with soul
have roots reaching downwards from above, while those with-
out soul reach upwards from a root which lives below. Some
beings are nourished by two kinds of food, others by one kind
alone. The two kinds of food by which beings endowed with soul
exist are the food of the soul and the food of the body. The soul


                               58
                           Translation


of the world is fed by unceasing movement. Bodies increase
from water and earth, foods of the lower world [mundi*]. The
breath, by which all things are filled, mixes with all things and
brings them to life. In human beings, intelligence is endowed
with consciousness. This intelligence is the quintessence and is
granted from heaven to human beings alone.
   ‘Of all living beings it is in humans alone that conscious-
ness provides the intelligence of divine reason; consciousness
both raises and sustains this intelligence. But since I am
being reminded to speak of consciousness I shall give you an
account of it shortly. It is noble and most holy; no less than
that of God Himself. But now I shall bring to a conclusion
what I began.


               Pure mind concealed by body

[7] ‘For I was speaking of the union with the gods in the very
beginning of things, by which humans alone fully enjoy the
respect of the gods; that is, those men who have attained so
much bliss that they perceive the divine consciousness in hu-
man intelligence; or rather the more than divine consciousness
which is only in God and in human intelligence.’
   ‘Is not consciousness the same in all men, O Trismegistus?’
   ‘Not all men, O Asclepius, have attained true understanding,
but through a rash impulse and without the true insight of
reason most, pursuing an illusion, are deceived. This begets evil
in minds and transforms the nature of the best living creature
into that of a wild beast and makes it behave like a savage
monster. But I shall give you a full account of consciousness and
  * See Translator’s Note on pp. 51-2.


                                59
                             Asclepius


all that is related to it when I speak of spirit. For of living beings
Man alone is twofold: one part is single, which the Greeks term
“ousiodes” and we call “the beauty of divine likeness”; the other
is fourfold, which the Greeks term “hulikon” and we call “per-
taining to matter”. From this the body has been made, and it
clothes what we have already said is divine in human beings.
In this, the single divinity of pure mind is concealed, together
with what is akin to it; this is the consciousness pertaining to
the pure mind which remains wholly at rest within itself, as if
enclosed by the wall of the body.’
   ‘Why was it necessary, O Trismegistus, that Man be placed
in the world [mundo] and not in that realm which is the abode
of God where he might have lived in the highest bliss?’
   ‘You are asking a good question, O Asclepius, and I pray God
to give me the means of returning an answer to it. For since all
things depend on his will, most certainly do these discussions
which deal with absolute supremacy. Of this principle we are
enquiring in our present conversation.


            Twofold origin and role of humanity

[8] ‘Then listen, Asclepius. The Lord and framer of all things,
whom we rightly call God, made a god second to Himself who
can be seen and apprehended by the senses. I do not call this
second god susceptible to the senses on account of his being
endowed with them; whether this is so or not I shall discuss at
another time. But I so call him because he is discerned by the
senses of those who do see. Since God made this divine being,
which was the first to issue out of Himself and was the second
after Himself, the sight of this being was beautiful to Him and


                                 60
                           Translation


since it was entirely filled with the goodness of everything, He
loved it as a child of His own divine nature.
   ‘Having such power and such goodness He willed that there
be another who could contemplate that being whom He had
made from Himself. Therefore He made humankind to be an
imitator of His reason and loving care. The will of God is the
greatest perfection since willing and accomplishing are com-
plete in the same instant of time. Thus He made human beings
of His own essence. He perceived that they would not be able to
love and care for all things unless He protected them with a
material covering. So God sheltered them with a corporeal
dwelling place and ordained the same for all human beings, and
in just proportion He mixed and blended two natures into one.
Thus God formed human beings of both spirit and body, that is,
of both eternal and mortal nature, so that being thus formed
they could do justice to their twofold origin: they could wonder
at and adore the celestial, while they could also care for and
manage the things on earth.
   ‘But in speaking of mortal things, I do not only mean earth
and water, two of the four elements which nature has made
subject to human beings, but also those things which humans
are responsible for doing in, or with, these elements: the culti-
vation of the earth itself, pasturage, building, ports, navigation,
communication, trade. All these constitute the strongest bond
between human beings, and between them and that part of the
world [mundi] which is composed of water and earth.
   ‘This earthly part of the world [mundi] is maintained by
knowledge and practice of the arts and sciences, without which
God has willed that it would not be brought to perfection. For
what pleases God necessity obeys, as effect follows will; and it


                                61
                            Asclepius


is not credible that what has pleased God will become displeas-
ing to Him, since He knew long before, not only what would
come to pass, but that it would please Him.


                Veneration for God and care
                      for the cosmos

[9] ‘But, Asclepius, I see how eagerly your quick mind hastens
to hear how a man can make heaven, or what is within heaven,
the object of his love and care. Then listen, O Asclepius. To love
the God of heaven and all that pertains to Him is nothing but
continual reverence for every thing. Such reverence has been
offered by no other creature, divine or mortal, but only by
human beings. By the wonder, adoration, praise and reverence
of men heaven and its citizens are well pleased. Not undeserv-
edly has the chorus of the Muses been sent down from Supreme
God into the company of men so that the material world should
not seem to be without order or lacking the sweetness of har-
mony. Indeed the sole Father of all sent down the Muses so that
He might be honoured by the songs and praisesof men, and that
praise should not be lacking in heaven or the sweetness of
harmony upon earth. And therefore a very few people endowed
with a pure mind have been allotted the sacred trust of contem-
plating heaven. But there are those who from the confusion
arising from their twofold nature have sunk back into the lower
mind because of the weight of their body; such have been
appointed to manage the elements and things associated with
this lower world. Man, then, is a creature, but I do not say that
he is inferior because he is in part mortal; rather on that
account is he better adapted and more effectual for his specific


                               62
                          Translation


purpose, for this, his stature seems rather to have been in-
creased by his mortality. Indeed, since he would not have been
able to sustain both realms had he not been formed from the
substance of both, he was so formed that he could care for the
things of the earth and also love the divine.


                       In praise of Man

[10] ‘And now, Asclepius, I desire that you apprehend the
principle of what I am about to say, not only with keen attention
but with liveliness of mind. Certainly, to most people this
principle surpasses belief, but it may be understood by more
spiritual minds as true and complete.
   ‘And so I shall begin. The first God is the Lord of Eternity,
the second is the cosmos, and the third is Man. God is the author
of the cosmos and those that dwell therein. He is the governor
of all things, together with Man, who is the governor of what
has been compounded. Because Man looks to the whole, which
is the proper object of his love and care, it follows that he is a
jewel to the cosmos, as is the cosmos to him. Because of his
divine composition, it seems Man has been called a world
[mundus], but the Greek “cosmos” is more accurate. Man knows
himself and he knows the cosmos, so that he remembers what
is fitting for his role and recognises what is useful for him and
what he should serve. While giving the greatest praises and
thanks to God and reverencing his image, he is yet aware that
he himself is the second image of God; for there are two images
of God: the cosmos and Man. Hence it comes about that Man is
a union of different parts. In part he is composed from soul and
consciousness, spirit and reason by which he is divine. By these


                               63
                           Asclepius


superior elements he seems able to ascend to heaven, but by the
worldly part which consists of fire, earth, water and air he
remains mortal upon earth lest he leave bereft and wasted all
those things committed to his care. Thus mankind has been
created in part divine and in part mortal, consisting of body.


            Humans possessed by possessions

[11] ‘Now the measure of this double being, that is of man, is
firstly reverence for God, which is followed by goodness. For
that goodness indeed seems perfect when it is protected by the
virtue of despising the desire for everything else. All those
things that are possessed because of the body’s desire for
earthly things are alien to the parts of a man which have
kinship with the divine. They are well named possessions, since
they were not born with us, but have come to be possessed by
us later. That is why they are called possessions. All things of
this kind are foreign to a man, including the body. Thus we
must despise not only those things which we grasp at but also
the very source within us from which the grasping comes. Thus
the force of reason leads me to think that a man should be called
a man only to the degree that, through contemplation of the
divine, he looks down and sets little value on that part of him
which is mortal, and which is joined to himself so that the lower
world may be cared for.
   ‘In order that both parts of man may be complete, note that
both are formed of four elements. Man is equipped with pairs of
hands and feet and other bodily members so that he may care
for the lower, that is the earthly, world; but with the four
elements of mind, consciousness, memory and foresight he may


                               64
                            Translation


know all things divine and contemplate them. Hence it arises
that he investigates the differences in things, their qualities, their
effects and their quantities with uncertain search. Being held back
by the weight and gross imperfection of the body, it follows that he
cannot easily see into the true causes of natural things.
    ‘Thus, if a man has been so created and fashioned, and given
such duty and service by the most high God, if he maintains the
world [mundum] in fine order, gives due reverence to God, and
is fully obedient to his will in both these charges, what reward
do you think he should be given? For as the world is the work of
God, he who carefully maintains its beauty, and even increases
it, joins his own work with the will of God, since by the dedica-
tion of his daily labour and care he gives order to the beauty
which God created by his divine will. Should not the reward be
that which our ancestors received, and which we ourselves
desire in our deepest prayers, if only it should please divine
goodness? That when we have completed our term of service,
discharged our worldly duties, and have been freed from the
bonds of mortality, God should restore us to our higher, that is
divine nature, free from blemish and inviolable.’


                         Soul in a noose

[12] ‘You speak with truth and justice, O Trismegistus.’
   ‘This, then, is the reward for those who lead their life giving
due reverence to God and loving care to the world [mundo]. It
is very different for those who live unjustly and are denied a
return to heaven. For they are obliged to undergo a shameful
transmigration into bodies that are unworthy to hold the sacred
spirit of man.’


                                 65
                            Asclepius


    ‘According to the tenor of your discourse, O Trismegistus,
souls who hope for future immortality run great risks in this
worldly life.’
    ‘Yet to some what I have said seems incredible; to others a
fable, and to others, perhaps, a matter for derision. For what is
held dear in this life of the body is the fruit which is taken from
possessions. But this is just what holds the soul in a noose, as
it is said, so that a man sticks to that part of himself by which
he is mortal, and the malice of this part, begrudging him
immortality, does not allow him to acknowledge that part which
is divine. Now I will speak to you as a prophet: after us there
will be no one who has that simple love, which is the nature of
philosophy. This consists in frequent contemplation and rever-
ent worship by which alone the divinity may be known. Many
destroy philosophy by their multifarious reasoning.’
    ‘But how do they make philosophy incomprehensible, and
how do they destroy it by multifarious reasoning?’


                  Philosophy destroyed by
                   multifarious reasoning

[13] ‘In this way, Asclepius. By ingenious argument they mix it
up with various kinds of incomprehensible study: arithmetic,
music and geometry. But pure philosophy, which depends only
on reverence for God, should attend to these other subjects just
sufficiently to marvel at the knowledge that the heavenly bodies
return regularly to the same predetermined positions, and that
the course of their orbits is obedient to number. Philosophy
should come to know the dimensions, qualities and quantities
of the earth, the depths of the sea, the capacity of fire and the


                                66
                           Translation


effects and nature of all these things in order to admire, revere
and praise the divine artistry and intelligence. To understand
music is to comprehend the arrangement of all things, which is
determined by divine proportion. By this proportion, which
comes from the Supreme Artist, the arrangement of all individ-
ual things is transmuted into one which gives rise to the most
beautiful and true harmony in the divine song.


            God is neither begotten nor begets

[14] ‘Those men who come after us will be deceived by cunning
sophists and turned aside from true, pure and holy philosophy.
To worship the Supreme Being with single mind and heart and
to reverence what has been made of his substance, to render
thanks to the divine will, which alone is infinitely full of the
Good: this is a philosophy that has not been dishonoured by the
perverse curiosity of the mind. But enough of this has been said.
   ‘Let us now start to discuss spirit and what is akin to it. First
there was God and hulê, which we take to be the Greek word for
“matter” [mundum]. Spirit accompanied matter [mundo], or
rather spirit was in matter [mundo] but it was in matter neither
in the same way as it was in God, nor in the same way as those
principles from which the cosmos came were in God. Those were
not in being because they had not been brought forth, but they
were already in God from whom they had the potential of birth.
Not only are those beings said to be birthless which have not yet
been born, but those which do not have the means of reproduc-
tion so that nothing can be born from them.
   ‘Therefore, all beings that are, have within them the power
of engendering and also of being engendered; from them arises


                                67
                            Asclepius


the potential of being born, even if those beings were born from
themselves. For there is no doubt that those born from them-
selves naturally have the potential to be born. From such beings
everything has been born. However, God is everlasting; the
eternal God can neither be born nor ever could be born. That
which is, which was, which ever will be, which is entirely from
itself: that is the nature of God.
   ‘Although hulê (matter), which is characteristic of the cos-
mos, and spirit do not seem to have been born from the
beginning, nevertheless they have in themselves the power and
natural capacity of being born and procreating. For the spring
of fertility is a property of nature, which has the power and
material of conception and birth within itself. Nature, then, has
the power of generation by itself, without any other entity.


       The unborn cosmos contains fertile nature

[15] ‘Now we must turn to those beings which have the power
to conceive only when joining with another, since the space of
the cosmos with all that is in it, was clearly not born, but
certainly has within itself the whole power of nature.
   ‘Again, I say it is space in which all things are. All these
things could not have existed if there had not been space to
sustain them all (space must be provided for everything that is
to be). Neither qualities, nor quantities, nor positions, nor
effects could be discerned for things which were nowhere.
   ‘Thus the cosmos, although it was not born, holds in itself the
natures of all things, or rather it provides most fertile wombs for
the conception of everything. This is the whole nature of matter:
that it has the power of creation though it was not itself created.


                                68
                           Translation


Just as it is a quality in the nature of matter to multiply, so the
same matter is equally fertile in multiplying evil.


                  How evils can be avoided

[16] ‘Asclepius and Hammon, I have not said what is said by
many: “Could God not have removed or averted evil from the
nature of everything?” Absolutely no response should be given
to these people. But for your sake I am going to proceed with
what I have begun, and give you an answer. Those men say
that God should have freed the world entirely from evil; yet
it is in the world in such great measure that it seems like one
of its limbs.
    ‘Nevertheless Supreme God did foresee and guard against
this in the most rational way possible when he deigned to
bestow on the minds of men consciousness, knowledge and
intelligence. For it is by these that we excel other living beings;
by these alone can we avoid the deceits of evil, trickery and vice.
A man guarded by divine intelligence and foreknowledge will
by a mere glance of the eye avoid such things before he becomes
involved in them. For the basis of knowledge resides in the
Supreme Good.
    ‘Everything in the cosmos is served and given energy by
spirit, which, like a musical instrument or mechanical device, is
subject to the will of the highest God. For now, let this be
sufficient for us.
    ‘He who is called the highest God and is known by mind
alone, is the ruler and governor of the god who may be perceived
by the senses. This “sensible” god comprehends in himself all
space, the substance of everything and the whole nature of


                                69
                             Asclepius


those that beget and create. He embraces whatever is, be it
never so great.


                    Structure of the world

[17] ‘All forms in the cosmos are moved and governed by spirit,
each according to its own nature given to it by God, but hulê or
matter is the receiver of them all. And of all these things God is
the ruler. He is their movement and He is their meeting. He
dispenses to all material things, whatever is necessary to each.
What is more, he fills them all with spirit, breathed into them
according to the natural capacity of each.
   ‘The hollow rotundity of the world, which has the shape of a
sphere, is itself invisible in its totality, by reason of its quality
and its form. Choose any place whatsoever at the top of the
sphere to look down below, from there you cannot see what is at
the bottom. Because of this many believe the world to have the
appearance and quality of a place. For it is only because of the
forms of individual things whose images seem to be imprinted
on the sphere that one believes it in a way to be visible, since it
appears to be like a painting. But in reality it is in itself ever
invisible. Hence it comes about that the bottom of the sphere,
if it be a part of or place in the sphere, is called in Greek
Hades, for idein in Greek means to see, and the bottom of the
sphere cannot be seen. Hence also ideas are called forms,
because they may be seen as forms. Therefore, too, the infer-
nal regions are called in Greek Hades, because they cannot
be seen, and in Latin Inferi, because they are at the bottom
of the sphere.
   These then are the first and most ancient causes; the head


                                70
                           Translation


and origin of everything; in them or through them or from them
all things exist.’


                    The sun and the mind

[18] ‘What really are all these things of which you speak, O
Trismegistus?’
   ‘One may say that the single substance within all individual
forms, within each and every one, is the substance of the
cosmos. Thus the cosmos nourishes bodies, and the spirit nour-
ishes souls; but understanding is nourished by that heavenly
gift by which alone mankind may be happy; not all men, but
only a few: those whose mind is such that they can receive so
great a benefit. As the world is lit by the light of the sun, so the
human mind becomes clear by that other light; indeed more so.
For whatever the sun illumines is sometimes deprived of that
light by the interposition of the earth, the moon, and the arrival
of night. But understanding, once it is joined with the human
soul becomes a single substance through a total fusion, so that
human minds of this kind are never impeded by the delusions
of darkness. Hence it is rightly said that such understanding is
the soul of the gods, but I say, not of all the gods, but only of the
great or principal ones, and of these only the original.’


                         Gods and stars

[19] ‘What gods do you say are at the very head of things, or the
source of primordial causes, O Trismegistus?’
  ‘I am putting great things before you and unveiling divine
mysteries. Before I make a start I implore the favour of heaven.


                                71
                             Asclepius


There are many classes of gods of whom some are subtle and
others sensory. The first are so described not because they are
considered to be beyond our apprehension; indeed, we appre-
hend them better than the ones we call visible, as the discourse
will show, and if you give your attention, you will be able to
see clearly. For this discourse is sublime and the more divine
for standing beyond the minds and purposes of men. If you do
not hear the words of the speaker with attentive obedience
the discourse will fly over you and flow round you, or rather,
it will flow back and mingle again with the waters of its own
source.
   ‘There are then gods who are the leaders of all the individual
gods. The other gods follow these leaders, of whom the first is
pure being. These sensory gods, true to their twofold origin,
accomplish all things through their sensory nature; each works
through another, and each illumines his own work.
   ‘The ruling principle or essence of the heavens (whatever is
understood by that term) is Jupiter, for it is through the agency
of heaven that Jupiter gives life to all beings. The essence of the
sun is light, for the goodness of its light is poured out upon us
through its orb. The thirty-six, who are called the horoscopes,*
that is the constellations which are always fixed in the same
place, have as their essence him who is called Pantomorphon,
or omniform, who gives different forms to different individuals.
The seven spheres, as they are called, have as their essence her
who is called Fortune or Fate through which all things are
   *Each of the thirty-six horoscopes represents one third of each of
the twelve signs; each sign signifies a constellation (Aries, Taurus,
etc.). The seven spheres are the apparent orbits of the seven planets
visible to the naked eye as viewed from the earth: Sun, Moon, Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn.


                                 72
                          Translation


changed by the law of nature. This law is absolutely unchang-
ing, yet all things are varied by continual movement.
   ‘Air is the instrument or mechanism of all things, through
which everything is accomplished, and the essence of this is }
[text missing here]
   ‘Since this is so, all things reach out to one another and are
connected from lowest to highest. They are connected to what is
moving towards them and to everything that appertains to
them.
   ‘The mortal is joined to the immortal, and that which is
perceptible to the senses to that which is not. In fact the whole
creation, not being a multiplicity, but one, obeys Him who is the
Supreme Ruler and the Supreme Lord. For all things depend
upon the one and all things flow from the one. When seen from
a distance they appear to be infinite, but viewed as a whole they
are in truth one, though one could say two: that from which all
proceeds and that by which all is made, that is the substance
from which all is made. By His will and His assent everything
else comes into existence.’


                      The name of God

[20] ‘Once more, what is this teaching, O Trismegistus?’
   ‘It is this, Asclepius. God, or Father, or Lord of all, or He
whom men call by any other name that is more holy and
reverend, should be held sacred by us because of our intelli-
gence. When we contemplate so great a divine spirit we shall
find we cannot name him precisely by any of these names. For
the spoken word is just this: a sound from the air when it is
struck by breath, expressing the whole will and thought of a


                               73
                            Asclepius


man; what from the senses he has perhaps understood in his
mind. The nature of his name is his whole substance ordered
into a few limited and compressed syllables. It is thus in man
the necessary connection between voice and ears. But the name
of God is the totality of sense, of breath, of air and of all things
in these or through these or from these.
   ‘Therefore I do not have any hope that the creator of the
majesty of the whole, the Father and Lord of all, can have a
single name, even one composed of many names. Indeed, He has
no name, or rather He has every name since He is one and He
is all, so that one must call all things by His name or give Him
the name of all things. Thus, as He is single, and as He is all,
He is filled with the potency of both sexes. Being ever pregnant
with His own will, throughout all time He brings forth whatever
He has wished to create. His will is nothing but the Good.
   ‘This same Good in all things is born naturally from His
divinity so that all things should be as they are, and as they
have been, and that they should be able to empower all things
that may come to be, with the ability to give birth from them-
selves. So, Asclepius, the explanation has been given to you as
to why and how all things come into being.’


                      The mystery of love

[21] ‘What, are you saying that God is of both sexes, O Trismeg-
istus?’
   ‘Not only God, Asclepius, but every being that has a soul and
also those that do not. It is not possible for any one of them to
exist without being fruitful. For if fecundity were withdrawn
from all living beings it would be impossible for them to con-


                                74
                           Translation


tinue for all time to be what they are; I tell you that Nature
holds and preserves within herself everything that has been
brought into being. Both sexes are full of the creative force, as
is the union of the two. In truth their union is incomprehensible.
This you may rightly call Cupid or Venus or you may use both
names.
    ‘Therefore take this to heart, for assuredly nothing is more
true or more evident than this: that the mystery of eternal
procreation was conceived by God and bestowed upon all crea-
tures by Him, the Lord of all Nature, in which Nature dwell the
greatest tenderness, joy, gladness, longing and divine love. I
would explain how great is the force and how compelling the
power of this mystery, were it not that each one of us knows this
from reflection on his own innermost feelings. For if you observe
that final moment when, through continuous interaction, we
come to the point where each gender pours its fertile power into
the other and the other eagerly seizes it and hides it within, then
by the mutual union at this moment the woman acquires the
strength of the man and the man relaxes in female passivity.
    ‘The performance of this sweet and vital mystery takes place
in secret lest the divinity of Nature that arises from the union
of sex were compelled by the mocking and ignorant to feel
ashamed if the act were performed openly; much worse still, if
it were seen by the enemies of religion.


                      Humans and gods

[22] ‘There are not many, indeed so few religious men or women
in the world [mundo] that they can be counted. Thus it is that
evil remains among the people through the lack of wisdom and


                                75
                            Asclepius


knowledge of what really exists. For it is from the intelligence
of divine reason, through which all things are constituted, that
contempt for the vices of the whole world [mundi] is born, and
this contempt is also their cure. But through continuing lack of
experience and absence of knowledge all the vices grow strong
and do irreparable damage to the soul which, being infected by
them, swells up as if from poison, except in the case of those who
have found the sovereign remedy: knowledge and intelligence.
Therefore, even if all this will be of use only to a few people, it
is worth pursuing and finishing the discussion as to why the
Deity considered human beings alone worthy to receive from
Him His own intelligence and knowledge.
   ‘So listen. After God the Father and Lord had brought forth
the gods he formed man, in part from the corruption of matter,
but in equal part from the divine. The imperfections of matter
then remained mixed within bodies, together with other imper-
fections derived from the food and nourishment which we take
through necessity, as do all living beings. It is therefore inevi-
table that the desires arising from greed, and other vices of the
mind steal into human souls.
   ‘As for the gods, they are composed of the purest part of
Nature, and they do not need the supports of reason and know-
ledge. For them immortality and the vigour of eternal youth are
themselves intelligence and knowledge. Yet lest they should
ever become separated from these, to safeguard the unity of
God’s design He established the rule of Necessity drawn up as
a law in accordance with eternal law. Of all living beings He
recognised man alone as having reason and knowledge through
which he can turn away and distance from himself the vices of
the body. He presented man with the hope of immortality and


                                76
                          Translation


the will to reach it. So God made man both good, and capable of
immortality, because of his two natures: the divine and the
mortal. Through God’s will it was ordained that man was thus
made superior both to the gods, who are formed only of an
immortal nature, and to all other creatures. Because of this
man is united to the gods in kinship and he therefore worships
them through religion and through purity of mind. For their
part the gods look down on all human affairs with tender love
and take care of them.


                   Man the maker of gods

[23] ‘But that may be said only of the few men who are endowed
with a faithful mind. Of those with a liking for vice let nothing
be said lest this highly spiritual discourse be dishonoured by
thinking of them.
   ‘And since I have spoken of the kinship and fellowship of men
with the gods, Asclepius, acknowledge the power and strength
of Man. Just as the Lord and Father, or God (his greatest name)
is the creator of the heavenly gods, so Man is the maker of the
gods in temples, who are content to be close to human beings.
Man not only receives light, but he gives it. Not only does Man
progress towards God, but he forms gods. Do you wonder at this,
Asclepius, or do you doubt as most people do?’
   ‘I am astounded, O Trismegistus, but I willingly assent to
your words and regard Man as most fortunate inasmuch as he
has attained such great happiness.’
   ‘And he, who is the greatest of all creatures, is justly worthy
of admiration. Everyone agrees that the race of gods clearly
sprang from the purest part of Nature, and their symbols are


                               77
                            Asclepius


simply heads which represent the whole being. But the forms of
gods which men create are taken from two natures: from the
divine, which is purer and far more god-like; and from that
which is within men, that is, from matter. Having been formed
from such matter, they are not represented by heads alone, but
by the whole body with all its members. Thus humanity is
always reminded of its own nature and origin as it continues to
represent divinity in this way. So just as the Father and Lord
has made the eternal gods to be similar to Himself, so humanity
has made its gods in the likeness of its own features.’


                       Disaster foretold

[24] ‘Are you speaking of statues, O Trismegistus?’
   ‘Yes, statues, Asclepius. Do you see how you lack faith? These
statues are made alive by consciousness, and they are filled
with breath. They do mighty deeds. They have knowledge of the
future which they predict through oracles, prophets, dreams
and in many other ways. They bring illnesses to men and cure
them. They give sadness and happiness according to merit. Do
you not realise, Asclepius, that Egypt is the image of heaven; or
to speak more precisely, all things which are set in motion and
regulated in heaven have been transferred, or have descended,
into Egypt? More truthfully still, our land is the temple of the
whole cosmos.
   ‘Yet since the wise should know all that is to come, it is right
that you should not be ignorant of something else. A time will
come when it appears that the Egyptians have worshipped God
with pure mind and sincere devotion in vain. All their holy
worship will turn out to be without effect and will bear no fruit.


                                78
                           Translation


For the gods will withdraw from earth to heaven and Egypt will
be deserted. The land which used to be the seat of religion will
be abandoned by the gods and become void of their presence.
Not only will foreigners, pouring into the region and covering
this land, neglect religion, but what is worse, religion, duties to
the gods and divine worship will be prohibited with penalties
prescribed by so-called laws. This holy land, this home of sanc-
tuaries and temples, will all be filled with sepulchres and the
dead. O Egypt, Egypt, only stories of your religion will survive,
and these your children will not believe. Only words carved in
stone will narrate your pious deeds. Scythians, Indians or other
such will inhabit Egypt; it will be peopled by barbarian neigh-
bours. The gods will return to heaven and abandon men, who
will then all die. Thus Egypt, deprived of gods and men, will
become a desert.
   ‘Now I speak to you, most holy river. I tell of your future. You
will be filled with a torrent of blood, right up to your banks, and
these you will burst through. Not only will your sacred waters
be polluted with blood, but your banks will burst open, and the
dead will far outnumber the living. Anyone who survives will be
recognised only by his language as Egyptian. From his actions
one would take him to be a foreigner.


                         Greater evils

[25] ‘Why do you weep, Asclepius? Egypt herself will be led into
much worse things than these, and she will be sunk in greater
evils. This once holy land which had such great love for the gods,
where alone they deservedly fixed their seat on earth because
of her devotion, for she taught men religion and piety, will


                                79
                             Asclepius


become an example of the most ferocious cruelty. Then to men,
tired of living, the cosmos will no longer seem an object of
wonder or something to be reverenced.
   ‘Nothing better was, is or ever will be seen than the goodness
of this whole cosmos, yet it will become a danger and a burden
to men. Because of this people will no longer love, but come to
despise it: this inimitable work of God, this glorious creation,
this perfection formed with such variety of images, this instru-
ment of God’s will, who in his work gives favour without
partiality. This cosmos, a world of many forms, brings every-
thing to unity, the unity of the all. It is a cosmos which can be
revered, praised and finally loved by those able to see it. The
dark will indeed be preferred to the light, and death thought
better than life. No one will have any regard for heaven and a
spiritual person will be deemed mad, and a materialist, wise.
An angry man will be considered strong and the most evil
regarded as good.
   ‘All the teaching about the soul that I have explained to you
is that the soul is born immortal or expects to attain immortal-
ity. This teaching will not only be laughed at, but considered an
illusion. It will be held as a capital offence, believe me, for a man
to have given himself over to reverence of the divine mind. New
rights will be created. There will be new laws. Nothing holy,
nothing religious, nothing worthy of heaven or the gods which
inhabit it, will either be heard or believed.
   ‘How grievous will be the withdrawal of gods from men! Only
the evil angels will remain. Mingling with humanity they will
force these wretches into all the evils of violence: wars, robbery,
fraud and all those things which are contrary to the nature of
souls. In those days the earth will not be stable, nor will the sea


                                80
                           Translation


be navigable. Heaven will not be traversed by the stars, for the
course of the stars will cease in the sky. Every divine voice will
of necessity be stopped. The fruits of the earth will wither, and
the land will no longer be fertile. The very air will hang heavy
in lifeless torpor.


                          Restoration

[26] ‘Such will be the old age of the world: irreligion, disorder,
and unreason concerning all that is good. When all this hap-
pens, O Asclepius, the Lord and Father, the god who is first in
power and governor under God who is the One, will consider the
conduct and wilful deeds of men. Through his will, which is the
goodness of God, he will take a stand against these evils and
against the universal corruption. He will restrain error and
every malign influence. Either he will dissolve all this in a flood,
or consume it by fire, or destroy it through disease and pesti-
lence spread through different lands. Finally he will restore the
world to its ancient beauty, so that it may again appear worthy
of reverence and wonder, and also that God the creator and
restorer of so great a work may be worshipped by people then
living with continual hymns of praise and benediction. By these
events the world will be reborn. There will be a return of all that
is good, a sacred and spiritual re-establishment of Nature her-
self compelled by the course of time through that will, which is
and was, without beginning and without end. For the will of God
has no beginning, but remains the same; as it is now, so will it
always be. For the nature of God is the purpose of his will.’
   ‘And the highest Good is this purpose, O Trismegistus?’
   ‘Will is born from purpose, Asclepius, and acts of willing from


                                81
                           Asclepius


will. And God wills nothing in excess, for he has unlimited
abundance of everything and he wills what he has. He wills
everything good, and he has everything that he wills. Therefore
all that he purposes and wills is good. Such is God, and the
world a reflection of that Good.’


                      God and the gods

[27] ‘The world is good, O Trismegistus?’
   ‘It is good, Asclepius, as I will teach you. For just as God
husbands and distributes to all individuals and classes all the
good things which are in the world [mundo], senses, soul and
life, so the world [mundus] apportions and provides all those
things which seem good to mortals: the succession of births in
due season, the germination, growth and ripening of the fruits
of the earth and similar things. Throughout all this God, abid-
ing above the vault of the highest heaven, is everywhere
observing all that is around. For there is a place beyond heaven
where there are no stars, far removed from all corporeal things.
   ‘The god who is the dispenser of life and whom we call
Jupiter, has a realm between heaven and earth. As for the earth
and the sea, they are ruled by Jupiter Plutonius. It is he who
nourishes mortal creatures and all that bears fruit. The fruits,
trees and soil are enlivened by the power of all these gods. But
there are other gods whose powers and actions are apportioned
to everything which exists. As for those gods who rule the earth,
they will be dispersed and then settled in a town at the very
extremity of Egypt, which will be founded towards the setting
sun, and to which the whole race of mortals will hasten both by
land and sea.’


                               82
                          Translation


   ‘But where are these gods now, O Trismegistus?’
   ‘They reside in a great city on the Libyan mountain. And that
is enough on the subject for the time being.


                             Death

‘We must now discuss what is immortal and what is mortal, for
hope and fear of death torment many who are ignorant of true
reason. Death is the result of the dissolution of the body when
it is worn out by toil and the days are over in which the parts of
the body were fit for living use in a single entity. Thus the body
dies when it ceases to be able to carry out the living functions
of a man. This then is death: the dissolution of the body and the
extinction of bodily senses. It is pointless to be concerned about
this. But it is necessary to be concerned about other things that
ignorance and human disbelief discount.’
    ‘What is it, O Trismegistus, that human beings ignore or
believe cannot exist?’


                       Life after death

[28] ‘Listen, Asclepius. When the soul has departed from the
body it will come under the power of a most potent spirit who
will examine its merits and judge it. When that spirit has
discerned that the soul is pious and just, he permits it to remain
in the region which it merits. But if he sees it covered with the
stains of crime, and oblivious of its vices, he hurls it from the
heights to the depths, delivering it to storms and whirlwinds, to
the ever contending elements of air, fire and water so that it is
caught between heaven and earth, continually buffeted in dif-


                               83
                           Asclepius


ferent directions by the turbulence of the world. Thus eternity
for such a soul is an evil in that by immortal judgement it is
sentenced to endless torture. Know then, to avoid this we must
stand in awe at such a fate, we must be fearful and guard
against it. The disbelievers after their crimes will be forced to
believe, not from words but from experience, not from threats
but from the agony of punishment.’
   ‘Then they are not punished by human law alone, Trismeg-
istus?’
   ‘In the first place, Asclepius, everything which exists on
earth is mortal. Now those beings which live according to the
laws of the body depart from life by reason of the same laws.
They all submit to punishments according to the merits of their
life or the crimes of which they are guilty. But the punishments
are worse after death since they may have been able to conceal
things during life. Punishments for all these things will be
given by the all-knowing divinity in exact measure to the nature
of the crimes.’


                     The just protected

[29] ‘Who are worthy of the greatest punishments, O Tris-
megistus?’
   ‘They are those who have been condemned by human laws
and thus suffered a violent death, for they seem not to have
returned their life to Nature as the payment of a debt, but to
have been deservedly punished. However, the just man is pro-
tected by his faith in God and by intense spiritual practice. God
protects such men from every evil, for He is the Father and Lord
of everyone. He alone is all. He freely reveals Himself to every-


                               84
                           Translation


one, not as though He were in some place, or possessed of some
particular quality or greatness, but by illuminating man with
the single intelligence of his mind. When the shades of error
have been dispersed from a man’s heart and the light of truth
has been perceived, that man joins himself with all his powers
to the divine intelligence. Through the love of this he is set free
from that part of his nature by which he is mortal and he
receives firm faith in future immortality. This, then, is the
difference between good and evil men. Every good man becomes
illumined by his piety, by his spirituality, by his wisdom and by
his worship and veneration of God. Everything is seen by the
light of true reason, as though by the physical eyes. The assur-
ance of his faith excels that of other men just as the sun excels
the light of the other stars. For the sun illumines the other
heavenly bodies less by the brightness of its light, than by its
divinity and purity.


                     The Sun a second god

‘Believe that this Sun is a second god, O Asclepius, who rules
all things and fills all beings in the cosmos with light, both those
with a soul and those without a soul. For if the cosmos is a being
which lives for ever; if it was, is and will be, nothing in it is
subject to death. Since each part lives for ever (as it does), and
is always within that same cosmos, and that single being is
ever-living, there is no place here for death. If therefore of
necessity this cosmos is everlasting, it must itself be the full-
ness of life and eternity. As the cosmos is everlasting, so the Sun
is the everlasting ruler of all things that live and of their very
life force; it gives forth life and does so continually. It is god of


                                85
                             Asclepius


the living and of all things which have the potential of life in the
cosmos. It is the everlasting ruler and dispenser of life itself. Yet
it has given life but once. Life is provided to all living beings by
eternal law in a way I shall describe.


                       God and eternity

[30] ‘The cosmos is moved within the very principle of life that
comes from Eternity: and its place is within this living eternity.
Because it is surrounded by the ever-living force of Eternity, as
if held by it, it will never cease to move, nor will it ever be
destroyed. The cosmos itself is the dispenser of life to every-
thing and it is where everything ruled by the Sun exists. The
movement of the cosmos comes from a twofold operation. It
receives life from outside, from Eternity, and it gives life to
everything within it, diversifying it according to numbers and
times, which are fixed and determined by the operation of the
sun and the course of the stars. For the whole cycle of time has
been written in divine law. Time on earth is marked by the
quality of the air and the variation of heat and cold, but celestial
time by the return of the constellations to the same places in the
course of their circuits. The cosmos is the container of time, and
by its course and movement the cosmos is kept alive. Time is
kept in being by ordained law. Through the process of alterna-
tion, order and time are responsible for the renewal of every-
thing which is in the cosmos.
    ‘Since all things are thus ordered nothing is still, nothing is
settled, nothing is immovable that comes into being, whether
celestial or terrestrial; only God is excepted; He alone. For He
is in Himself and from Himself and round Himself. He is all. He


                                86
                          Translation


is complete and He is perfect. He is his own enduring stillness
and He cannot be moved by any impulse from His place, since
all things are in Him and He alone is in all things; unless
anyone were bold enough to say that He moves in Eternity; but
it is more accurate to say that He is motionless Eternity itself
into which the movement of all cycles returns and from which
the movement of all cycles begins.


                      Eternity and time

[31] ‘It follows that God has been for ever still and so has
Eternity, which is similar to Him. Eternity contained within
itself a cosmos not yet born which we rightly say is sensory. This
cosmos has been brought into being as an image of Eternity, and
as an imitator of Eternity. Moreover, time has the power and
nature of its own stillness since although it is always in motion,
it necessarily turns upon itself. Although Eternity is still, im-
movable and unchanging, the course of time (which does move)
always returns to Eternity, and that movement is directed by
the law of time itself. Thus it happens that Eternity which alone
is still through time, exists itself in time; all movement seems
to take place in time.
   ‘Thus it is that the stillness of Eternity is in movement, and
that the movement of time is made still by the unchanging law
which governs its course. And thus it is credible that God is
moved within Himself, by the same immobility. Indeed, in the
unlimited stillness itself movement is unmoving, for the law of
the unlimited is itself unmoving. Such then is the nature of this
being: imperceptible, unlimited, unthinkable, immeasurable. It
can neither be held in nor taken away; nor can it be hunted


                               87
                            Asclepius


down. Where it is, whither it goes, whence it came, how or what
it is, cannot be known. For it is moved within supreme stillness
and yet this stillness is within itself; be it God or Eternity or
both, or one in the other, or both in both. On account of this,
Eternity is without limitation of time. But although time can be
defined by number, by alternation, by periodic return through
revolution, time is eternal. Thus both appear infinite, both
eternal. Inasmuch as stillness is without movement, so that it
can support all that moves, it is justly sovereign by virtue of its
constancy.


             Divine and human consciousness

 [32] ‘Thus God and Eternity are the origin of all that is. But
the cosmos, because it is in movement, does not have primacy,
for its movement precedes its stillness, since its unchanging
constancy is based on the law of everlasting movement.
   ‘Consciousness in its totality, being similar to divinity, is
itself motionless, yet it moves itself within its own stillness.
Consciousness is holy, uncorrupt and eternal and whatever can
be named higher than that, if anything can be. Eternity abides
in the very truth of the Supreme God. It is totally full of all
sensory forms and of all knowledge. It abides, as it were, with
God. Cosmic consciousness is a receptacle of all sensory forms
and of all branches of knowledge. Man’s consciousness depends
on the tenacity of his memory, that is, the memory of all that he
has experienced. But the divine consciousness in its descent
reaches as far as the human being. For Supreme God did not
wish divine consciousness to be poured into all living beings,
lest it should be shamed at being joined to other creatures.


                                88
                         Translation


   ‘Now the intelligence of human consciousness, be it of what-
ever kind or capacity, consists totally in the memory of past
events, and through the tenacity of this memory it has become
the ruler of the Earth. But the intelligence of Nature can be
attained through the capacity of cosmic consciousness from
everything which is subject to the senses in the cosmos. The
consciousness of Eternity, which comes next, has also been
bestowed and its quality made known by the sensory world. But
the intelligence and quality of the consciousness belonging to
the Supreme God is truth alone. Of this not even the faintest
outline of a shadow may be seen on Earth. For where anything
is known through the dimension of time there is falsehood.
   ‘Where you see birth, there you see delusion. So you see,
Asclepius, where we stand, what we are engaged upon and what
we dare to attain. But to you, O Highest God, I give thanks, for
Thou hast illumined me with the light of the Divinity that is to
be seen. And you, O Tat, Asclepius and Hammon, hold these
divine mysteries in the secrecy of your heart. Cover them with
silence and conceal them with quiet.
   ‘Now there is this difference between intelligence and con-
sciousness: through concentration of mind our intelligence
comes to understand and discern the nature of the conscious-
ness pertaining to the world, but the intelligence of the world
comes to know Eternity and the gods above. And so it happens
to us men that, as if through a mist, we come to see what is in
heaven, as far as this is possible through the limited nature of
human consciousness. Although this power of ours to discern
such exalted things is very limited, it is quite unlimited when
it sees through the grace of pure consciousness.



                              89
                           Asclepius



                       There is no void

[33] ‘As for the void which now seems so important to so many
people, I consider that there is no void, there never could have
been a void and there never will be a void. All parts of the
cosmos are totally full, so that the cosmos itself is full and
complete with bodies that differ in both form and quality; and
each has its own appearance and size. One may be larger than
another and one smaller; one may be more dense and another
more subtle. Those that are more dense are more easily seen,
as are those which are larger. Those that are smaller or subtler
can only be seen with difficulty and sometimes not at all. These
we know of only by keen attention. Hence many people believe
that these are not bodies, but empty places, which is impossible.
   ‘And the same would be true of space which is said to exist
outside the cosmos (that is, if it does exist, which I do not
believe). I consider that space would be full of beings which can
be apprehended only by mind, that is, of beings similar to its
own divinity. Thus this cosmos which we say is perceptible by
the senses is totally full of bodies and of beings which accord
with its own nature and quality. We do not see all their true
forms; indeed, some appear excessively large, and others far too
small. It is either owing to the extent of the intervening space,
or to the feebleness of our sight that they so appear to us, and
because of their excessive smallness they are believed by many
not to exist at all. I speak now of spirits which I believe dwell
with us, and demi-gods which live between the purest part of
the air above us and those realms where there is no fog and no
clouds and no disturbance arising from any celestial body.
   ‘Take care, then, Asclepius, not to speak of anything as void,


                               90
                           Translation


unless you say what it is void of, for instance, that it is void of
fire or of water or similar things. For even if one happens to see
an object, whether small or great, which seems to be void of
these things, though it may appear empty, it cannot be empty
of spirit and air.


                      The sensory world

[34] ‘The same should be said about “place”: it is a word that
has no meaning on its own. For “place” only has meaning in
relation to that of which it is the place. If this principle is
removed, then the meaning of the word is incomplete. That is
why we rightly speak of the place of water, or of fire, or of other
similar things. For just as it is impossible for anything to be
empty, so one cannot know what place is on its own. If one were
to imagine a place without an object of which it is the place, then
the place would appear empty, which I do not believe is possible
in the cosmos. If nothing is empty, then what place is cannot be
known unless you add the dimensions of length, breadth and
height to it, as you do to human bodies.
   ‘Since this is how things are, O Asclepius, and you who are
present, know that the causal world of mind, discernible only by
contemplation, is incorporeal, and that nothing corporeal can be
mingled with its nature, nothing distinguished by quality,
quantity or number, for in it there is nothing of that kind.
   ‘As for this cosmos, which is called sensory, it is the recepta-
cle of all the qualities or substances of all the sensory forms and
bodies, none of which can be given life without God. For God is
everything. Everything comes from Him and depends on His
will. This whole is good, beautiful, wise and unique; perceived


                                91
                            Asclepius


and understood by Him alone, without whom nothing ever was,
is, or will be. All things are from Him, in Him and through Him:
the various qualities and their many guises, the vast sizes
beyond all means of measure, and forms of every kind. For
these, if you understand them, O Asclepius, you will give thanks
to God. If you give your attention to the whole, you will come to
understand that in truth the sensory world and all within it is
from the world above and is covered by that as if by a garment.


          Individuals differ within an archetype

[35] ‘Every class of being, O Asclepius, whether mortal or
immortal, rational or irrational, whether endowed with a soul
or without a soul, each will have the characteristics belonging
to its archetype. And although each being has the whole form of
its archetype, yet each individual of the same form differs from
the others. Although archetypal man has one form, so that a
man may be known as such by his appearance, nevertheless
within that same form individual men differ from each other.
   ‘For the ideal form, being divine, is incorporeal, as is every-
thing which is apprehended by mind. Since therefore there are
two elements of which forms consist, the corporeal and incorpo-
real, it is impossible for any form to come into existence exactly
similar to any other form at different points of time and place.
Indeed, they are changed as often as the hour has moments,
during the turning of the circle in which He dwells, who has all
forms, whom we have called God. So the ideal form is perma-
nent and brings forth from itself as many and as diverse images
as the revolution of the cosmos has moments, for the universe
itself changes in the course of its revolution, but the ideal form


                               92
                           Translation


itself neither changes nor revolves. Thus the forms of every
class persist but there are differences within the same form.’


                   Changes in appearance

[36] ‘And does the cosmos change its appearance, O Trismeg-
istus?’
   ‘O Asclepius, you seem to have been asleep while all this was
being explained to you. For what is the cosmos in reality? And
of what is it made? Simply of everything that has been brought
into being? So what you are really enquiring about is the sky,
the earth and the elements. And what changes in appearance
more often than these? The sky is either moist or dry, cold or
hot, clear or murky. These appearances are all within the one
form of heaven, and they frequently interchange.
   ‘The earth too continually changes in appearance as when it
brings forth fruit and then nourishes what it has brought forth,
when it yields the varied qualities and different quantities of its
fruits, and determines their stages and courses of development,
and above all, when it produces the qualities, scents, tastes and
appearances of trees, flowers and berries. Fire brings about
many changes that are worthy of a deity. Reflections of the sun
and moon also present every kind of form. In a way they are
similar to the reflections of our mirrors which return images of
their originals with comparable splendour.


                     Animation of statues

[37] ‘But let this be enough on such things.
  ‘Let us return to man and reason. Because of the divine gift


                                93
                            Asclepius


of reason, man is said to be an animal with reason. Even though
what has already been said about man is a cause of wonder, it
is less wonderful than this gift of reason. This merits more
admiration than anything else: that man has been able to
discover his divine nature and make it manifest.
   ‘Because our sceptical ancestors erred greatly in their opin-
ion of the gods and gave no attention to worship and divine
religion, they invented an art by which they could create gods.
To this discovery they added a complementary power drawn
from the nature of the cosmos, making the two work together.
Since they could not make souls they summoned the souls of
demons or angels and implanted them into images with sacred
and divine rites. By means of these they were able to create
idols having both good and evil powers.
   ‘Your grandfather, O Asclepius, was the founder of medicine,
to whom a temple has been consecrated on the mountain of
Libya, near the Shore of the Crocodiles, in which lies his terres-
trial part, that is, his body. The rest, or rather the whole of him,
if manhood consists in the consciousness of life, has gone to
heaven to better advantage. For now through his divine spirit
he still furnishes the sick with every kind of aid which pre-
viously he used to provide through the art of medicine. Is it not
true that my grandfather Hermes, after whom I am named,
resides in his eponymous town whence he aids and cures all
those who come to him from every land? We know how much
good Isis, the consort of Osiris can do, when well disposed, and
how much harm when she is angry. It is easy to anger the
terrestrial and material gods since they have been made and
put together by men, from both divine and human natures. On
a similar principle some living beings are called sacred by the


                                94
                          Translation


Egyptians, and their souls, which were sanctified while they
were alive, are worshipped in particular cities. Thus the Egyp-
tians live by their laws and are called by their names. It seems
to be for this reason, Asclepius, that these beings are wor-
shipped and revered in some cities, but are considered
differently by others. On this account the cities of Egypt habitu-
ally make war on each other.’


                       Terrestrial gods

[38] ‘What is the nature of these gods which are considered to
be terrestrial, Trismegistus?’
   ‘O Asclepius, it is derived from herbs, stones and spices
which have in themselves the power of divinity in Nature.
Because of this these gods are delighted by frequent sacrifices,
hymns, praises and sweet sounds in tune with the celestial
harmony. Thus what comes from the heavens can be enticed by
the frequent use of heavenly means to happily endure long
periods of time, content with humanity. Thus man is the creator
of gods. And do not think that the actions of these earthly gods
are random, Asclepius. The celestial gods dwell in the highest
realm of heaven. Each one fulfils and protects the order of
beings which has been assigned to him. But these gods of ours
help us as though they were loving parents: either they
attend to particular matters, or they foretell the future
through lot and divination, or they provide certain things,
and by these means they come to help human beings, each in
his own way.’




                               95
                             Asclepius



                Destiny, necessity and order

[39] ‘Then what part in the scheme of things do Destiny or the
Fates play, O Trismegistus? Do not the celestial gods govern
universals, while the terrestrial gods look after individual things?’
   ‘What we call Destiny, O Asclepius, is the Necessity of all
events which take place and these are ever bound to herself by
the links of a chain. Thus she is either the cause of everything,
or she is the Supreme God, or she is formed from that God as
the second god, or she is the sustained order of all things
celestial and terrestrial, which is established by divine laws.
Thus Destiny and Necessity are inseparably bonded together;
the first of these is Destiny which begets the seeds of every-
thing, but Necessity brings those seeds to fruition which depend
on Destiny for their inception. Order follows these two; Order
being the interweaving and timing of all things that must come
to pass. For nothing is composed without Order, and this cos-
mos is complete in every detail. For the universe itself is moved
by Order and is established wholly upon Order.
   [40] ‘There are then these three: Destiny, Necessity and
Order. They have arisen in the first place from the will of God,
who governs the cosmos by his law and through divine reason.
God has therefore entirely removed from them all willing and
non-willing. They are neither moved by anger, nor deflected by
favour, but serve the Necessity of eternal reason; this Eternity
is ineluctable, unmoving and indissoluble.
   ‘First then, is Destiny, which having, as it were, cast the
seed, produces the offspring of all that is to come. Necessity
follows, by whom all things are compelled by force into activity.
Order is third, which maintains the connection of what has been


                                96
                          Translation


ordained by Destiny and Necessity. Such then is Eternity; it
neither begins nor ceases to be and it is turned in the everlast-
ing motion of its revolution by fixed and immutable law. Its
parts are always rising and falling alternately, so that as the
times change those same parts which had fallen, rise again.
Thus revolving circularity is its principle, so that things are so
well bound to it that you do not know where the beginning is, if
there is a beginning, since everything always seems both to
precede and follow itself. Moreover consequence or fate are
mixed into everything in the cosmos.
   ‘As much has been said to you on each of these subjects as a
human being can express and the Supreme Deity both wills and
allows. It only remains for us to return to the care of the body,
blessing God and praying to Him. For in discussing divine
matters we have, I may say, sufficiently filled ourselves with
the food of the soul.’


                   Prayer of thanksgiving

[41] Leaving the sanctuary of the temple they began to pray to
God, having first turned towards the South, for anyone wishing
to ask anything of God at sunset should face that direction, just
as at sunrise one should face East. As they began their prayer,
Ascelpius said in a low voice,
   ‘O Tat, do you think that we should suggest to your father
that he order frankincense and perfumes to be used when we
say our prayer to God?’
   When Trismegistus heard him he was stirred and said, ‘Give
us a far better omen than that, Asclepius. It is like sacrilege to
burn frankincense and other things when you pray to God; for


                               97
                            Asclepius


He lacks nothing, who is Himself all things or in whom are all
things. Rather let us adore Him in giving thanks, since this is
the finest incense for God: that thanks be given Him by mortals.
   ‘We render you thanks, most high and potent God, for it is
only by your grace that we have come to the light of your
knowledge. Holy and reverend is your name, the one name by
which God alone is to be praised according to the religion of our
fathers. We do indeed thank you since you deign to give all
beings your paternal care, your religion and your love, and even
sweeter, upon us you have bestowed these powers: perception,
reason and intelligence; perception, that we may recognise you;
reason, that we may follow up our intuition, and knowledge,
that in knowing you we may find joy.
   ‘Having been saved by your divine power we rejoice, because
you have shown yourself to us in your totality. We rejoice,
because while we are still in these bodies, you deign to conse-
crate us for Eternity. This is the only way human beings have
of giving thanks: to acknowledge your majesty. We have known
you and the supreme light by conscious intelligence alone. We
understand you, O true life of life, O fertile womb of all that has
come into being. O eternal steadfastness, we have known you in
your conception of the whole of abundant Nature. In every
prayer through which we reverence the Good of all good, we
plead only for this: that you may wish us to continue to serve
you in the love of your knowledge and that we may never be
separated from this kind of life.
   ‘Desirous of these things we turn to a repast that is pure, and
undefiled by the flesh of animals.’




                                98
                        Bibliography
Allen, M.J.B. and Rees, V. (eds), Marsilio Ficino: His Theology, His
   Philosophy, His Legacy (Brill, Leiden, 2001).
Camplani, A., ‘Riferimenti biblici nella litteratura ermetica’, Annali di
   storia dell’ esegesi 10/2 (1993), 375-425.
Clarke, Emma C., Dillon, John M. and Herschbelt, Jackson P. (trs),
   Iamblichus, De mysteriis (Brill, Leiden, 2004).
Copenhaver, B.P., Hermetica, an English translation of the Corpus
   Hermeticum and Asclepius (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
   bridge, 1992).
De Durand, G.-M., ‘Un traité hermétique conservé en arménien’, Revue
   de l’Histoire des Religions 190 (1976), 55-72.
Eckhart (Meister), Selected Writings, tr. Oliver Davies (Penguin Clas-
   sics, London, 1994).
Emerson, R.W., Selected Writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson, ed. B.
   Atkinson (Modern Library edition, New York).
Fowden, G., The Egyptian Hermes (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
   bridge, 1986).
Hanegraaff, W.J. (ed.), Dictionary of Gnosis and Western Esotericism
   (Brill, Leiden, 2005).
Luibheid, C., Pseudo-Dionysius: The Complete Works, an English
   translation (Paulist Press, New Jersey, 1987).
Mahé, J.-P., ‘Les Définitions d’Hermès Trismégiste à Asclépius’, Revue
   des Sciences Religieuses 50 (1976), 193-214.
Mahé, J.-P., ‘La voie d’immortalité à la lumière des Hermetica de Nag
   Hammadi et de découvertes plus récentes’, Vigiliae Christianae 45
   (1991), 347-75.
Mahé, J.-P., ‘Preliminary remarks on the Demotic Book of Thoth and
   the Greek Hermetica’, Vigiliae Christianae 50 (1996), 353-63.
Mahé, J.-P., ‘The Definitions of Hermes Trismegistus to Asclepius’, an
   English translation, in The Way of Hermes (Duckworth, London,
   1999).




                                  99
                            Bibliography

Naydler, J., Temple of the Cosmos (Inner Traditions, Rochester, Ver-
  mont, 1996).
Naydler, J., Shamanic Wisdom in the Pyramid Texts (Inner Tradi-
  tions, Rochester, Vermont, 2005).
Naydler, J., ‘Plato, Shamanism and Ancient Egypt’, in Temenos Acad-
  emy Review (2006).
Nock, A.D. and Festugière, A.J., French translation and critical edition
  of the Corpus Hermeticum and Asclepius (Les Belles Lettres, Paris,
  1991; first published 1946).
Pagels, E., The Gnostic Gospels (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1990; first
  published 1979).
Paramelle, J. and Mahé, J.-P., ‘Nouveaux parallèles grecs aux Défini-
  tions hermétiques arméniennes’, Revue des Etudes Arméniennes 22
  (1990-91), 115-34.
Paramelle, J. and Mahé, J.-P., ‘Extraits hermétiques inédits dans un
  manuscrit d’Oxford’, Revue des Etudes Grecques 104 (1991), 109-39.
Procter, E.E.S., Alfonso X of Castile (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1951).
Quispel, G., ‘The Gospel of Thomas Revisited’, in B. Barc (ed.), Collo-
  que international sur les textes de Nag Hammadi (Québec 22-25
  août 1978), (Québec 1981), 218-66.
Robinson, J.M. (ed.), The Nag Hammadi Library, English translation
  of Gnostic scriptures (HarperCollins, San Francisco, 1990; first
  published 1978).
Ross, Hugh McGregor, The Gospel of Thomas, an English translation
  (Watkins, London, 2003; first published 1987).
Salaman, C.F.A., Van Oyen, D., Wharton, W.D., ‘The Corpus Her-
  meticum’, an English translation, in The Way of Hermes
  (Duckworth, London, 1999).
Terian, A., ‘The Hellenizing school, its time, place and scope of activi-
  ties reconsidered’, in N. Garsoïan et al. (eds), East of Byzantium:
  Syria and Armenia in the Formative Period (Dumbarton Oaks
  Publishing Service, Washington, 1982).
Yates, Frances A., Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition (Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1991; 1st edn, 1964).




                                  100
                                 Index
This index refers to the section numbers which appear in bold in
square brackets in the translation.


air, 2, 3, 6, 10, 19, 20, 25, 28, 30,      movement of, 30-2
     33                                    relationship to man, 10, 25
archetypes, 4, 5, 35 (see also             space of, 15
     classes)                              totally full, 33-4
arithmetic, 13
arts and sciences, 8                    daemons, 4-6
Asclepius, 2, 7, 10, 20, 21, 23,        darkness, 18, 25
     24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 32, 36, 38,    death, 4, 25, 27, 28, 29
     39, 41                             delusion, 18, 32
  founder of medicine, 37               destiny, 39-40
                                        dissolution of body, 27
beauty, 7, 8, 11, 13, 26, 34            divine spirit, 1, 20, 28, 37
                                        dreams, 24
classes, 3-5, 19, 27, 35 (see also      duty, 11, 24
     archetypes)
consciousness, 3, 6-7, 10, 11, 16,      earth, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 13, 18, 24,
     24, 32, 37                              25, 27, 28, 30, 32, 36
constancy, 31, 32                       earthly things, 11, 27
constellations, 19, 30                  Egypt, 24-5, 27, 37
contemplation, 11, 12, 34               Egyptians, 24, 37
corruption, 22, 26                      elements, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 28,
cosmos, 2-4, 14, 16-18, 34, 36,              35, 36 (see also fire, air,
     37, 39, 40                              water, earth)
  brings to unity, 25                   essence, 2, 8, 19
  consciousness of, 30                    quintessence, 7
  dispenser of life, 30                 eternity, 5, 10, 28, 29-32, 40, 41
  Egypt its temple, 24                  evil, 7, 15, 16, 22, 25-6, 28-9, 37
  eternal, 29-31



                                     101
                                   Index

fate, 19, 40                             Hammon, 1, 16, 32
Fates, see destiny                       heaven, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 12, 19,
fire, 2, 3, 10, 13, 26, 28, 33, 34,          24, 25, 27, 28, 32, 36, 37, 38
      36                                 heavenly bodies, 3, 13, 29
foresight, 11, 24                        holy river, 24
forms, 2, 3-5, 8, 9. 11, 17, 18, 19,     human (beings), 5-9 (see also
      22, 23, 24, 32-6                       man)
   ideas as forms, 17                    humanity/humankind, 4, 6
fortune, 9
                                         illusion, 7, 25
geometry, 13                             immortality, 2, 4, 12, 19, 22, 25,
God                                            27, 29, 35
  artist, 13                             Indians, 24
  creator, 2, 8, 10, 11, 14, 20, 21,     infinity, 14, 19, 31
    22, 25, 34                           intelligence, 6, 7, 13, 16, 20, 22,
  knowledge of, 3, 41                          29, 32, 41
  name, 16, 20, 37, 41                      divine, 7, 10, 29
  nature of, 14, 26, 31                     human, 6, 7, 16, 20, 22, 32
  reverence for, 1, 9, 11, 12, 13,          of nature, 32
    14, 25, 26, 41
  ruler of all, 3, 16-17, 19             knowledge, 3, 13, 16, 22, 32, 41
  second god, 6, 29, 39                    of arts and sciences, 8
  supreme, 9, 11, 14, 16, 32, 39,          foreknowledge, 16, 24
    40, 41                                 of God, 3, 41
  work of, 11, 25, 26
gods, 4-7, 18-19, 22, 25, 27, 32,        law
    37, 38                                  of the Egyptians, 24, 25, 37
  Cupid and Venus, 21                       eternal, 22, 29-31, 39, 40
  demi-gods, 33                             human, 28, 29
  images, 23-4, 37-8                        of movement and time, 30, 31,
  Isis and Osiris, 37                          32
  Jupiter, 19, 27                           of nature, 19
  leaders, 18, 19                        life, 2, 4, 6, 12, 19, 25, 27, 28,
  man’s union with, 6-7, 22                    29-30, 34, 37, 41
  work of, 19                            light
Good, 1, 4, 14, 16, 20, 22, 26-7,           divine, 32, 41
    29, 34, 37, 41                          of the sun, 18, 19, 29
goodness, 8, 11, 19, 25, 26                 of truth, 29
greed, 22                                   of understanding, 18, 23, 25, 41
                                         Lord
Hades, 17                                   of all, 20, 29


                                       102
                                       Index

  creator of gods, 22-3                   nature, 2, 3, 8, 14, 15, 21, 26, 41
  of eternity, 10                           divine, 8, 11, 14, 21, 22, 23,
  first in power, 26                           26, 31, 37, 38
  framer of all things, 8                   of gods, 6, 22, 23, 38
  of nature, 21                             human and divine, 6, 8, 9, 22,
  supreme, 19                                  23, 29, 37
love, 1, 6, 8, 9, 10, 22, 25, 29, 41        intelligence of, 32
  divine, 1, 8, 21                          mind of, 34
  as nature of philosophy, 12               of souls, 25
                                            of the universe, 14, 15, 1, 17,
Man/mankind (see also human                    19, 33, 37
    beings)                               necessity, 4, 5, 7, 22, 25, 29,
 consciousness, 32                             39-40
 dual nature, 4, 6-11, 22, 23,
    29, 37                                obedience, 11, 13, 19
 fall into evil, 22, 25                   One (see also whole), 1, 2, 3, 5, 7,
 form, 5, 11, 35                              8, 13, 19, 20, 26, 35, 36, 41
 intelligence, 6, 16, 18, 20, 22,         oracles, 24
    29, 32, 37                            order, 9, 11, 20, 30, 38, 39-40
 maker of gods, 23, 38
 name, 20                                 perception, 41
 power, 23, 29, 32, 41                    philosophy
 praise, 6, 23                              natural, 1
 third god, 10                              nature of, 12-14
 work of, 6, 11                           place, 17, 27, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35
matter, 3, 7, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23          power
mind, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 14, 16,        divine, 1, 8, 26, 27, 28, 41
    18, 19, 22, 24, 25, 29, 32, 33,         generative, 2, 14-15, 21
    34, 35                                  human, 23, 29, 32, 41
 causal world, 34                           natural, 15, 37, 38
 divine, 25                                 temporal, 31
 lower, 9                                 praise, 9, 10, 13, 25, 26, 38, 41
 pure, 7, 9, 22, 24                         songs and hymns, 9, 26
 union with gods, 5                       procreation (see also generative
mortality, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,            power) 21
    19, 22, 27, 28, 29, 36                prophets, 24
movement, 2, 6, 17, 19                    proportion, 8, 13
 of cosmos, 30-2                          punishment, 28-9
 in time, 31
music, 13                                 reason, 2, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 22,
mysteries, 19, 21, 32                         29, 37, 40


                                       103
                                   Index

  false, 12-13                           union
  ignorance of, 27                         gods, 7
religion, 5, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 37,       forms, 5
     41                                    parts, 10
reward, 11-12                              sexual, 21

Scythians, 24                            water, 2, 3, 6, 8, 10, 24, 28, 33,
self-control, 6                               34
service, 11                              whole (see also One), 2, 3, 4, 10,
seven spheres, 19                             19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 34, 35, 37
Sophists, 14                             will
soul, 2-6, 12, 18, 21, 22, 25, 27-9,       of God, 7, 8, 11, 14, 16, 19, 20,
     35, 37, 40                               22, 25, 26, 34, 40
sound, 20, 38                              of man, 20, 22
space, 4, 15, 16, 33                     words
sphere, 17                                 carved in stone, 24
spirit, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16-18, 33        meaning of, 34
stars, 19, 25, 27, 29, 30                  spoken, 19, 20, 28
sun, 3, 18, 19, 27, 29, 30, 36, 41       work, see God, gods, Man
  a second god, 29                       world, 4, 6, 7, 12, 17-18, 25, 28
                                           beauty of, 8,11, 26
Tat, 1, 32                                 goodness, 27
temples, 23, 24                            lower, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11
thanks to God, 10, 14, 32, 34, 41          mind, 34
time, 2, 8, 20, 21, 26, 30-1, 32,          old age of, 26
    35, 38                                 rebirth of, 26
truth, 12, 19, 21, 24, 29, 32, 34          substance, 18
                                           vices, 22
understanding, 7                         worship, 12, 14, 22, 24, 26, 29, 37




                                       104
