               Ud›na:
       Exclamations

                   A TRANSLATION


WITH AN INTRODUC TION & NOTES

                                        BY


         ≥ H fi N I S S A R O B H I K K H U

           (GEOF F REY De GRAF F )
                                                             2




        Copyright © ≥h›nissaro Bhikkhu 2012

This book may be copied or reprinted for free distribution
        without permission from the publisher.
            Otherwise all rights reserved.
                                              3



                                 Contents

Acknowledgements — 6
Introduction — 8
  Meaning in the Ud›na
  On Reading the Ud›na

U D fi N A : E XC L A MA T I O N S

1 : Awakening — 26
  1:1 Awakening (1) (Bodhi Sutta)
  1:2 Awakening (2) (Bodhi Sutta)
  1:3 Awakening (3) (Bodhi Sutta)
  1:4 Overbearing (Huhuºka Sutta)
  1:5 Brahmans (Br›hma˚a Sutta)
  1:6 Mah› Kassapa (Kassapa Sutta)
  1:7 Aja (Aja Sutta)
  1:8 Saºg›maji (Saºg›maji Sutta)
  1:9 Ascetics (Ja˛ila Sutta)
  1:10 B›hiya (B›hiya Sutta)

2 : Muccalinda — 37
  2:1 Muccalinda (Muccalinda Sutta)
  2:2 Kings (R›j› Sutta)
  2:3 The Stick (Da˚˜a Sutta)
  2:4 Veneration (Sakk›ra Sutta)
  2:5 The Lay Follower (Up›saka Sutta)
  2:6 The Pregnant Woman (Gabbhinin Sutta)
  2:7 The Only Son (Ekaputta Sutta)
  2:8 Suppav›s› (Suppav›s› Sutta)
  2:9 Vis›kh› (Vis›kh› Sutta)
  2:10 Bhaddiya K›˘igodha (K›˘igodha Sutta)

3 : Nanda — 47
  3:1 Kamma (Kamma Sutta)
  3:2 Nanda (Nanda Sutta)
  3:3 Yasoja (Yasoja Sutta)
  3:4 S›riputta (S›riputta Sutta)
  3:5 Mah› Moggall›na (Kolita Sutta)
  3:6 Pilinda (Pilinda Sutta)
                                                                    4


   3:7 Mah› Kassapa (Kassapa Sutta)
   3:8 Alms (Pi˚˜a Sutta)
   3:9 Crafts (Sippa Sutta)
   3:10 Surveying the World (Loka Sutta)

4 : Meghiya — 60
   4:1 Meghiya (Meghiya Sutta)
   4:2 High-strung (Uddhata Sutta)
   4:3 The Cowherd (Gop›la Sutta)
   4:4 Moonlit (Juñha Sutta)
   4:5 The Bull Elephant (N›ga Sutta)
   4:6 Pi˚˜ola (Pi˚˜ola Sutta)
   4:7 S›riputta (S›riputta Sutta)
   4:8 Sundarı (Sundarı Sutta)
   4:9 Upasena Vaºgantaputta (Upasena Vaºgantaputta Sutta)
   4:10 S›riputta (S›riputta Sutta)

5 : So˚a the Elder — 74
   5:1 The King (R›jan Sutta)
   5:2 Short-lived (App›yuka Sutta)
   5:3 The Leper (Ku˛˛hi Sutta)
   5:4 Boys (Kum›ra Sutta)
   5:5 Uposatha (Uposatha Sutta)
   5:6 So˚a (So˚a Sutta)
   5:7 Revata (Revata Sutta)
   5:8 finanda (finanda Sutta)
   5:9 Jeering (Sadh›yam›na Sutta)
   5:10 CÒ˘a Panthaka (Panthaka Sutta)

6 : Blind from Birth — 88
   6:1 Relinquishment of the Life Force (fiyusama-osajjana Sutta)
   6:2 Seclusion (Pa˛isalla Sutta)
   6:3 It Was (Ahu Sutta)
   6:4 Sectarians (1) (Tittha Sutta)
   6:5 Sectarians (2) (Tittha Sutta)
   6:6 Sectarians (3) (Tittha Sutta)
   6:7 SubhÒti (SubhÒti Sutta)
   6:8 The Courtesan (Ga˚ika Sutta)
   6:9 Rushing (Up›ti Sutta)
   6:10 They Appear (Uppajjanti Sutta)

7 : The Minor Section — 103
   7:1 Bhaddiya (1) (Bhaddiya Sutta)
   7:2 Bhaddiya (2) (Bhaddiya Sutta)
                                                                                         5


   7:3 Attached to Sensual Pleasures (1) (K›mesu Satta Sutta)
   7:4 Attached to Sensual Pleasures (2) (K›mesu Satta Sutta)
   7:5 The Dwarf (Laku˚˛ha Sutta)
   7:6 The Ending of Craving (Ta˚h›khaya Sutta)
   7:7 The Ending of Objectification (Papañcakhaya Sutta)
   7:8 Kacc›yana (Kacc›yana Sutta)
   7:9 The Well (Udap›na Sutta)
   7:10 King Udena (Udena Sutta)

8 : P›˛ali Village — 113
   8:1 Unbinding (1) (Nibb›na Sutta)
   8:2 Unbinding (2) (Nibb›na Sutta)
   8:3 Unbinding (3) (Nibb›na Sutta)
   8:4 Unbinding (4) (Nibb›na Sutta)
   8:5 Cunda (Cunda Sutta)
   8:6 P›˛ali Village (P›˛alig›ma Sutta)
   8:7 A Fork in the Path (Dvidhapatha Sutta)
   8:8 Vis›kh› (Vis›kh› Sutta)
   8:9 Dabba (1) (Dabba Sutta)
   8:10 Dabba (2) (Dabba Sutta)


Appendices — 127
   A P P E N D I X O N E : On the history of the Ud›na
   A P P E N D I X T W O : Exclamations by the Buddha recorded elsewhere in the Canon
      but not included in the Ud›na
   A P P E N D I X T H R E E : Sutta passages in Saªyutta Nik›ya 3 and 4 that may have
      originally been composed as ud›nas
   A P P E N D I X F O U R : Pre-eminent disciples of the Buddha mentioned in the Ud›na

Glossary — 144
Abbreviations — 146

Bibliography — 147
                                                                                   6




                             Acknowledgements

    More than a decade ago I began supplying translations from the Pali Canon
to what was then a fledgling website, Access to Insight. Among the earliest
translations was an anthology of passages from the Ud›na. For quite some time
now I have wanted to replace that anthology with a complete translation, both
because my early effort contained a number of minor mistakes, and because, as I
became more sensitive to the literary dimensions of the Pali Canon, I came to see
that the Ud›na is a well-constructed whole, with each part amplifying and
amplified by the others. Only a complete translation could do justice to the skill
with which the collection was compiled.
    In October of last year I had the opportunity to revisit the text and to begin
work on a complete, more correct translation. With the benefit of computerized
versions of the Pali Canon now available, I was able not only to compare various
editions of the text, but also to explore more fully other ud›nas and ud›na-like
passages in the Pali Canon. Also, I made a more thorough study of the text and
the values it expresses, creating the tables used in the Introduction. And I tried to
place the text in the context of Indian literary theory, to help get a better sense of
the effect at which the compliers may have been aiming.
    At the same time, because of the recent surge of interest in approaching early
Buddhist texts from modern and post-modern perspectives, I felt that it would
be worthwhile to consider how beneficial these approaches might be with this
particular text. These considerations made their way into the Introduction as
well. I hope you find them useful.
    Just as I was completing the manuscript, I became aware of two works by
Ven. finandajoti in this area: a complete translation of the Ud›na and a
comparative study of parallels to the Ud›na verses in the Ud›navarga, a text
composed in the language called Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit. Comparing my work
with his, I was able to ferret out a few more errors in my translation and to
incorporate the results of some of his research into my notes. Thus I am in his
debt. However, because the aims and method of his translation differed from
mine, I feel that this new translation is not superfluous.
    The primary foundation for this translation is the Thai edition of the Pali text,
printed by Mah›makut R›javidy›laya, Bangkok, 1981. I have also consulted Sri
Lankan and Burmese editions available online through the Journal of Buddhist
Ethics and the Digital Pali Reader. All of these texts have their flaws, so I have had
to make choices among them. In cases where the Thai text contained readings
that were obviously wrong, I have chosen readings from one or both of the
other sources. In cases where none of the variant readings in the different
editions seemed obviously better than the others, I have stuck with the Thai
reading even when the other editions were seconded by the Ud›navarga. This is
because there already exist English translations based on the Sri Lankan and
                                                                               7


Burmese editions; I felt that the Thai edition should have its chance to speak to
the larger world.
    Many people have reviewed the manuscript and made valuable suggestions
for improvement. In addition to the monks here at the monastery, this includes
Michael Barber, Charles Malloy IV, Addie Onsanit, Nathaniel Osgood, Mary
Talbot, and Barbara Wright. Any errors that remain in the manuscript, of course,
are my own.

                                         ≥h›nissaro Bhikkhu
                                         (Geoffrey DeGraff)


M E T T A F O R E S T M O NA S T E R Y
J A NU A R Y , 2 0 1 2
                                                                                     8




                                  Introduction

                         M E A N I N G I N T H E U D fi N A


    The term ud›na has two meanings, one denoting a vocal expression, the other
a genre of text. As a vocal expression, it can be translated roughly as
“exclamation,” and in particular an exclamation that’s spontaneous and inspired.
As a genre of text, ud›na means a style of narrative that developed in an effort to
commit to memory the Buddha’s inspired exclamations, along with brief
accounts of the events that inspired them.
    Several passages in the Pali Canon (such as AN 7:64 and MN 22) depict the
Buddha as mentioning nine genres in which his teachings and events in his life
were memorized during his lifetime, ud›nas being among them. Cullavagga XI
reports that, shortly after the Buddha’s passing away, a large council of his
disciples met to agree on a standardized form in which to remember his
teachings, beginning a process that led to the Pali Canon we have today. At
present, the Khuddaka Nik›ya (Short Collection) contains as its third text a
collection of eighty ud›nas called, simply, Ud›na. (To distinguish between
individual ud›nas and the collection as a whole, the standard practice is to
capitalize the latter and not the former.) Scholars have questioned whether this
collection is related to the ud›nas collected during the Buddha’s lifetime—for a
few observations on this question, see Appendix One—but there are no
compelling reasons to believe that the relationship is not close. That is why I felt
that a complete translation of the Ud›na we currently have would be
worthwhile.
    The role of the Ud›na within the context of the Pali Canon is to focus on the
values and principles—“meaning” in the larger sense of the term—that underlie
the Buddha’s teachings. This point can be seen clearly in how each ud›na is
organized. It begins with a narrative of an event or series of events, followed
(with a few variations) by the formula: “Then, on realizing the significance/meaning
(attha) of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed.” This, in turn, is followed
by a spontaneous exclamation—a poem, a passage of prose, or a combination of
the two—in which the Buddha expresses what that meaning or significance is.
    To understand the purpose of this way of structuring each ud›na, we can
compare it to the itivuttakas (“quotations”), which resemble the ud›nas in three
ways: They are listed among the original nine genres of Buddhist texts; they
currently exist as a book in the Khuddaka Nik›ya (the fourth, immediately after
the Ud›na); and each consists of a prose passage followed by a poem. The
itivuttakas differ from the ud›nas in that the prose passage is a summary of a
Dhamma talk, and the concluding poem further distills the basic points of the
                                                                                  9


talk into an easy-to-memorize form. Thus the closing passages in an itivuttaka
are meant primarily as memory aids.
     In an ud›na, however, the closing exclamations are aimed more at
understanding the significance of what can be learned from an event. Although
some of these exclamations give recommendations on what to do in response to
an event of that particular sort—such as how to deal with unfair criticism—most
of them express and extol more general values in their praise or criticism of
people or attitudes involved in the event. The fact that no human being but the
Buddha was present to record some of the exclamations reported in the Ud›na—
such as those in 1:1, 1:2, 1:3, 1:7, 2:1, 3:10—suggests that he himself played a role
in the shaping of the genre, for these events wouldn’t have been recorded unless
he had reported them to others. But whether the idea of collecting these pieces as
a distinct genre originated with him or with his disciples, we have no way of
knowing.
     What we can know, however, when we look carefully at the form and
content of the Ud›na as a whole, is that a cohesive set of values runs throughout
the collection. We also find that those values run directly counter to the values of
domestic society in the Buddha’s time: stating, for instance, that brahmans—
people worthy of respect—are made and not born; and that the happiness of lay
life is nothing compared to the happiness of renunciation.
     This last value, of course, flies in the face of the domestic values not only of
the Buddha’s time, but also of human society in all time. Thus the Ud›na seems
aimed at having a revolutionary impact on the mind of any reader raised in
domestic society. To make these values palatable to the reader, the compilers
employed all the literary skills at their disposal when shaping the narratives
around the Buddha’s explanations and organizing them into a collection. So as
we look at the values expressed in the Ud›na, we have to be sensitive not only to
the content of the Buddha’s spontaneous exclamations, but also to the form and
content of the compilers’ contributions in collecting them.
     First, in terms of the Ud›na’s content, we can learn a lot, on the one hand, by
looking at the types of events that inspired the Buddha to break forth with a
spontaneous exclamation, and on the other, by identifying the values his
exclamations express.
     What kinds of events would inspire an awakened one to exclaim? When we
sort the events described by the narrators into categories, we find that they fall
primarily into two: those inciting a sense of pas›da (cheerful confidence) in the
practice and attainment of the Dhamma, and those inciting a sense of saªvega
(dismay) over the heedlessness of those who don’t practice the Dhamma. In the
following list, individual ud›nas are indicated by their number in the collection.

Pas›da:
   Celebrating the Dhamma and the Buddha’s own attainment of it: 1:1, 1:2, 1:3,
      1:4, 1:7, 2:1, 3:10, 6:1, 6:3, 7:7, 7:8, 8:1, 8:2, 8:3, 8:4
                                                                                              10


   Celebrating the attainments of his disciples: 1:5, 1:6, 1:8, 1:10, 2:10, 3:1, 3:2, 3:3,
       3:4, 3:5, 3:6, 3:7, 4:4, 4:6, 4:7, 4:9, 4:10, 5:6, 5:7, 5:10, 6:7, 7:1, 7:2, 7:5, 7:6, 8:9,
       8:10
   Joy in solitude: 4:5
   Miraculous events: 2:8, 7:9, 8:6
   In praise of the practice of giving, virtue, and meditation: 8:5

Saªvega:
   Chastising monks: 2:2, 3:8, 3:9, 4:1, 8:7
   Commenting on monks’ misbehavior: 4:2, 5:5, 5:8
   Seeing the foolishness of other sectarians: 1:9, 2:4, 2:6, 6:4, 6:5, 6:6, 6:10
   Teaching children who are harming animals: 2:3, 5:4
   Teaching a king: 5:1, 6:2
   Seeing hardships of domestic life: 2:5, 2:6, 2:7, 2:9, 8:8
   Commenting on the foolishness/heedlessness of lay people’s behavior: 2:8,
      5:9, 6:8, 6:9, 7:3, 7:4
   Contrasting the attainment of the Dhamma with the situation of ordinary
      people: 3:10, 8:6
   In response to a death: 2:7, 4:3, 5:2, 5:3, 7:10, 8:8

    It’s interesting to note that the emotions of pas›da and saªvega are paired
rarely in the Canon but frequently in later Therav›da texts focusing on the
emotions to be developed when visiting memorials to the Buddha, such as
stÒpas or Buddha images. Pas›da is the appropriate response to feel when
reflecting that the Buddha’s total unbinding (parinibb›na) transcended birth and
death because he had awakened to the birthless, deathless dimension (8:1, 8:3,
8:4). Saªvega is the appropriate response when reflecting on your own
situation, subject to repeated rebirths and redeaths as long you have yet to
awaken to that dimension yourself.
    Thus the experience of reading the Ud›na is like that of gaining inspiration
from a stÒpa or Buddha image—a point reinforced not only by its explicit
reference to the dimension beyond birth and death in 8:3 and 8:4, but also by the
large number of deaths mentioned throughout the collection. It’s also reinforced
by the way in which the deaths of those who have not reached awakening (2:7,
4:3, 4:8, 5:2, 8:8) are contrasted with the deaths of those who have (1:10, 5:3, 7:10,
8:9, 8:10, and the foreshadowing of the Buddha’s own death in 6:1 and 8:5). When
an unawakened person dies, it’s a cause for saªvega; when an awakened person
dies, a cause for pas›da—although in the case of Suppabuddha the leper (5:3), his
death is a cause for both: saªvega over the past kamma that led to his present
rebirth as a leper, and pas›da for the fact that, having gained the Dhamma-eye
just before dying, he is now a prominent deva in the heaven of the Thirty-three.
    It’s also interesting to note from these lists how often the narratives in the
Ud›na focus on celebrating the accomplishments of the Buddha’s disciples, a
point to which we will return below.
                                                                                                 11


     Just as it’s instructive to note what would cause the Buddha to exclaim, it’s
also instructive to note what doesn’t: He never exclaims over the beauty of the
body or of material possessions, the wealth or power of those who govern, the
joys of a loving relationship, or a kindness done to him personally. In other
words, he doesn’t exclaim over the things that people in domestic society
normally value. This fact relates directly to the values that his exclamations
express.
     To understand these values, it’s useful to map them against a list found
elsewhere in the Canon, in the Buddha’s instructions to his foster mother
concerning the eight basic values that determine which dhammas—teachings,
actions, qualities of mind—qualify categorically as true Dhamma. Again, in the
following list, ud›nas expressing a particular value are identified by their
numbers in the collection. Individual ud›nas expressing more than one value are
listed more than once.

       “As for the dhammas of which you may know, ‘These dhammas lead:
   to dispassion, not to passion [1:7, 2:1, 2:8, 3:10, 4:4, 7:3, 7:4];
   to being unfettered, not to being fettered [1:1, 1:2, 1:3, 1:5, 1:8, 1:9, 1:10, 2:1,
       2:4, 2:10, 3:2, 3:4, 3:5, 3:6, 3:10, 4:4, 4:9, 4:10, 6:1, 6:3, 6:4, 6:6, 6:7, 6:8, 6:9,
       6:10, 7:1, 7:2, 7:3, 7:4, 7:5, 7:6, 7:7, 7:8, 7:9, 7:10, 8:1, 8:2, 8:3, 8:4, 8:5, 8:6,
       8:7, 8:8, 8:9, 8:10];
   to shedding, not to accumulating [1:4, 2:4, 4:8, 7:9, 7:10];
   to modesty, not to self-aggrandizement [3:1, 3:8, 5:9, 6:4, 6:5];
   to contentment, not to discontent [1:6, 2:1, 2:10, 3:7, 4:6];
   to seclusion, not to entanglement [1:8, 2:1, 2:5, 2:6, 2:7, 2:8, 2:9, 3:3, 3:9, 4:2,
       4:5, 4:6, 5:6, 6:2, 8:7, 8:8];
   to aroused persistence, not to laziness [2:2, 3:1, 3:3, 4:1, 4:2, 4:3, 4:6, 4:7, 5:2,
       5:3, 5:5, 5:7, 5:8, 5:10, 8:5];
   to being unburdensome, not to being burdensome’ [1:6, 2:3, 3:7, 3:9, 5:1,
       5:4]:
       You may categorically hold, ‘This is the Dhamma, this is the Vinaya,
   this is the Teacher’s instruction.’” — AN 8:53

    The first thing to notice about these values is that, even though they are
closely interrelated, they can be divided into three sorts: those touching on the
goal of the practice (dispassion, being unfettered), those touching on internal
virtues needed to reach that goal (shedding, contentment, aroused persistence),
and those touching on one’s relations with others in the course of the practice
(modesty, seclusion, and being unburdensome). In each case, these values are all
noble—which means that nothing is lost when you engage in putting them to
the test. Even if you don’t attain the ultimate goal, you have developed qualities
worthy of inner and outer respect, at the same time alleviating a fair amount of
suffering in the here and now.
    Also notice that all eight values are expressed in the Ud›na. Far and away, the
largest number of ud›nas focus on values related to the goal—dispassion and
                                                                                  12


being unfettered—but in doing so, they also provide motivation for developing
the virtues and values needed to attain that goal. This motivation is important,
for all of these values, as we have noted, run counter to the common values of
domestic society—as expressed both in the particular structures of Indian society
in the Buddha’s time, and in the common values of domesticity in human
cultures across time.
    For instance, the values of dispassion and being unfettered run counter to the
pursuit of sensuality and to the sense of “I,” “mine,” “we,” and “ours” that
underlie family life. The value of shedding runs counter to the domestic desire to
accumulate as a protection against future lack; because this value includes the
shedding of pride, it also runs counter to the desire for prominence in social
affairs. The value of contentment runs counter to the domestic concern with
accumulating wealth and stockpiling for the future; the value of modesty,
counter to the desire for fame and recognition; and the value of seclusion,
counter to the domestic desire to be surrounded by loved ones. The value of
being unburdensome, on its face, coincides with the domestic value of frugality,
but on a deeper level—in light of the fact that the act of creating a family places
extra burdens on the environment to feed and support more people—it counsels
celibacy as the ideal way to be unburdensome. Thus it runs directly counter to
the domestic idea that the creation of a family is a gift to the world. As for
persistence, both the Dhamma and domestic society value persistence in the
pursuit of one’s aims, but they differ widely in their understanding of what those
aims should be.
    All of this means that the task of the Ud›na is to convey—and make
convincing—the countercultural message that the reader would be wise to focus
on the drawbacks of many of the values and structures in which he/she has been
nurtured since childhood, and to see the advantages of taking on a more
demanding set of values in their place.
    This task, in turn, relates directly to the form of the Ud›na as a collection, for
it shows clear signs of having been consciously and skillfully shaped to present a
coherent impression and message. It’s not simply a stenographic account of all
the Buddha’s explanations or a random set of texts arranged so that they would
be easy to memorize.
    The fact that the Ud›na was consciously shaped can easily be seen by
comparing it with the rest of the Pali Canon. On the one hand, the Ud›na does
not contain all the Buddha’s exclamations recorded in the Canon. Appendix Two
contains the three accounts of the Buddha’s exclamations that the Ud›na’s
compilers did not include in their collection, and a glance at these accounts helps
to suggest why: In one case (SN 56:11), the exclamation was too short to convey
much of a meaning. In the other two, there is no record of any event whose
significance—sparking either saªvega or pas›da—incited the Buddha to exclaim.
In both of these latter two incidents, the Buddha also had to explain the
exclamation to his audience. Thus these cases did not fit into the pattern of the
ud›na genre.
    On the other hand, there are six passages in the Kosala-saªyutta and M›ra-
saªyutta (SN 3 and 4) that follow the form of the ud›nas: a short narrative,
                                                                                 13


followed by the formula, “Then, on realizing the significance/meaning of that, the
Blessed One on that occasion…” but instead of exclaiming, the Buddha is said
simply to have “spoken these verses.” Aside from this small discrepancy, this
formula is exclusive to the ud›nas.
     As it turns out, one of these passages has a direct parallel, and another a near
parallel, in the Ud›na itself. (See Appendix Three.) All of this suggests that these
passages may have been part of the original collection of ud›nas but later were
moved to the Saªyutta instead. Similarly, but at one step further removed,
several suttas included in the Bhikkhu-saªyutta (SN 21) lack the standard ud›na
formula but otherwise follow the ud›na format in presenting a common ud›na
theme: the Buddha commenting in verse on the good or bad behavior of his
monks. In fact one of these suttas—SN 21:7—is a near parallel with Ud 7:5. Thus
these suttas might have originally been ud›nas that were later moved to the
Saªyutta as well. Because nothing in the content or form of any of these
Saªyutta passages differs from the ud›nas included in the Ud›na, there is the
possibility that the monks who made the final selection simply wanted the
number of passages in the Ud›na to equal a round eighty, the number of years
in the Buddha’s life.
     The conscious shaping of the Ud›na is also apparent when we look at its
overall arrangement, for it shows a literary sensibility at work. First, there is the
narrative arc of the whole. It begins with the Buddha’s awakening, includes
several passages that foreshadow the Buddha’s final unbinding (nibb›na)—the
final unbinding of B›hiya in 1:10, the narratives of the Buddha’s last year in 6:1
and 8:5, and the discussions of unbinding in 8:1-4—and ends with the final
unbinding of another one of his disciples, Ven. Dabba Mallaputta. The form of
the genre would not have allowed the collection to end with the Buddha’s own
final unbinding—he wouldn’t have been present to comment on the meaning of
the event—and so Ven. Dabba Mallaputta’s final unbinding is made to stand in
for the Buddha’s, thus giving narrative closure to the whole.
     Underlying this narrative arc are two doctrinal arcs. The first lies in the fact
that the ud›nas of the first four chapters focus on basic principles—the true
brahman (the person worthy of admiration) in the first chapter, true bliss in the
second, the ideal monk in the third, and the importance of training the mind in
the fourth—whereas all of the ud›nas in the last two chapters focus on the theme
of being unfettered. The collection thus starts with basics and ends with the
ultimate goal.
     The second doctrinal arc starts with the description of dependent co-arising in
the first three ud›nas. While this teaching is by no means simple or elementary,
it is basic in the sense that it provides the framework for understanding one of
the more difficult teachings in the collection: the arahant’s abandoning of any
sense of personal identity—a point mentioned in 2:1, 4:1, 6:6, and 7:1, and
graphically symbolized in 8:9 and 8:10. In this way the first ud›nas introduce a
string of ud›nas that help to explain how what in the last two ud›nas looks like
annihilation actually is not: Instead, it is simply the ending of suffering and the
attainment of an indescribable destination, beyond location, that brings
unwavering bliss.
                                                                               14


     Within these overall arcs, many of the individual ud›nas play off of one
another in a dialog on recurring themes. For instance, 3:2, 3:3, and 3:4 all
comment on how the ideal monk’s mind is like rock, a point illustrated in the
narrative to 4:4, in which Ven. S›riputta’s mind is shown to be even stronger
than rock. The proper attitude of the alms-going monk is the focus of 1:5, 3:7,
and 3:8, and this in turn highlights a recurring narrative motif: Many of the
Buddha’s exclamations are inspired by observations on lay life that he or the
monks make while going on alms. This shows that alms-going was not only a
means of physical support for the monks, but also an opportunity for them to
reflect on the Dhamma.
     Other recurring themes include the jealousy of other sectarians over the
support given to the Buddha and his disciples (2:4, 4:8), and the difference
between the way in which pain is handled by unawakened people on the one
hand (2:6) and by the Buddha and his disciples on the other (2:7, 3:1, 4:4, 8:5).
There are also three ud›nas on the misery of having children (2:6-8) and three on
the theme of not harming others, in which—with no little irony—the Buddha
teaches King Pasenadi the same message in 5:1 that he teaches two groups of
boys tormenting animals in 2:3 and 5:4.
     There is also a recurring pattern of imagery, as when the clearing of the well
water in 7:9 foreshadows the clearing of the river in 8:5. And, as we have noted
above, the most prominent recurring theme concerns the difference between the
death of those who haven’t gained awakening and the death of those who have.
All of these elements give an overall unity to the collection.
     This sense of unity is augmented by the fact that the collection has a
dominant aesthetic savor (rasa). Ancient Indian aesthetic treatises focused a great
deal of attention to the theory of savor, to the point where “savor” became the
central technical term in Indian aesthetics. Critics wrote volumes on how savor
gave unity to a work of art and on the techniques for best conveying it. The basic
theory was this: Artistic composition expressed states of emotion or states of
mind called “vibh›va” or “bh›va.” According to the earliest treatises, which were
apparently known in the Buddha’s time, there are eight basic emotions: love,
humor, grief, anger, energy, fear, disgust, and astonishment. The reader or
listener exposed to the presentation of these emotions did not participate in them
directly; instead, he/she savored them as an aesthetic experience at one remove
from the emotion. Thus, the savor of grief is not grief but compassion. The savor
of energy is not energy itself but admiration for heroism. The savor of love is
not love but an experience of sensitivity. The savor of astonishment is a sense of
the astounding. The proof of the indirectness of the aesthetic experience was that
some of the basic emotions were decidedly unpleasant, while the savor of the
emotion was to be enjoyed.
     Although a work of art might depict many emotions, and thus—like a good
meal—offer many savors for the reader/listener to taste, one savor was
supposed to dominate. I have noted elsewhere that the dominant savor of the
Dhammapada is the heroic. In the Ud›na, the dominant savor is the astounding
(abbhÒta), and it is conveyed on many levels. On the most obvious level are the
many events that the narrative itself describes as amazing and astounding. These
                                                                                    15


range from the perfectly natural—such as the amazing stubbornness of the
monk in 5:5—to the more singular—the Buddha’s ability to see through the
disguised ascetics in 6:2, the abrupt end of the verbal abuse of the monks in 4:8,
and amazing and astounding qualities of the Dhamma & Vinaya described in
5:5—to the outright supernatural—such as the most improbable event in the
entire collection: Suppav›s›’s unnaturally long pregnancy and labor issuing in a
healthy child just as the Buddha says, “May Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter be
well & free from disease. And may she deliver a son free from disease.” (2:8)
Other supernatural events include the Buddha’s taking Nanda to the heaven of
the Thirty-three in 3:2, his crossing the river in 8:6, the clearing of the well in 7:9,
the clearing of the river in 8:5, Ven. Dabba Mallaputta’s final display of his
powers in 8:9, and many others.
     Before proceeding to the other levels on which the astounding savor is
conveyed in the Ud›na, it’s necessary to point out that—in line with the theory
of savor just mentioned—the collection conveys subsidiary savors as well, both
to augment the astounding and to counteract its excesses. The primary
augmenting savor is the heroic, the foremost example being the Buddha’s
behavior in 8:5 after his final illness: Not only does he continue walking to
Kusinar› despite his weakness and pain, but he also has the compassion to make
sure that Cunda, the donor of his final meal, is never made to feel regret for
having given the food that brought on his final illness. Other examples of
heroism in the collection include Ven. Saºg›maji’s firm response to his previous
wife’s use of his son as bait in 1:8, the endurance of the unnamed monk in the
face of pain in 3:1, and Ven. S›riputta’s ability to withstand the yakkha’s blow in
4:4.
     The primary leavening savor in the Ud›na is humor. This is to counteract the
tendency of the astounding savor, if over-emphasized, to become unbelievable,
and thus ridiculous in the eyes of the reader. To counter this reaction, the
narrators add a dash of humor when relating the most astonishing events to
show that, no, they have not lost their sense of reality. For instance, after
treating the story of Suppav›s›’s pregnancy, the compilers add the humor of the
discussion between Ven. Moggallana and his supporter, along with the humor of
the final scene, in which Suppav›s›, thrilling over her son, states that she would
be willing to go through the same misery seven times more. Also there is the
humor in the story of Ven. Nanda, as his fellow monks, after hearing of his deal
with the Buddha, treat him sardonically like a man who has sold himself for a
price.
     Other examples of humor in the collection include Ven. finanda’s obtuseness
in 3:3 and 5:5, Ven. S›riputta’s “slight headache” in 4:4, the reflections of the bull
elephant in 4:5, Queen Mallik›’s frank rebuff of King Pasenadi’s advances in 5:1,
the famous story of the blind men and the elephant in 6:4, and Ven. S›riputta’s
teaching Ven. Bhaddiya the Dwarf, not knowing that Ven. Bhaddiya has already
attained arahantship, in 7:2. All of these touches of humor—and there are
others—help to establish a sense of rapport between the narrators and the
reader, thus making the blatantly astounding events in the collection, if not more
believable, at least more palatable.
                                                                                    16


    There is one savor, however, that is studiously avoided throughout the
collection, and that is the horrific, the savor associated with disgust. On two
occasions when the story risks getting into disgusting details, the narrative
avoids direct language. The first instance is in the story of Sundarı, the lady
wanderer killed by her fellow wanderers in 4:8. When they dig up her body, the
narrative simply refers to their digging up “what they had buried.” The second
instance is in the story of the Buddha’s final illness in 8:5. When he develops
dysentery, the illness is not mentioned by name. Instead, it is a “severe illness
with blood.” In this way, the horrific savor is carefully avoided so as not to spoil
the astounding.
    In addition to cultivating the astounding savor by narrating astounding
events, the Ud›na also conveys it in more subtle ways. To begin with, there is
what may be called the cast of characters. In AN 1, the Buddha lists his foremost
disciples—male and female, ordained and lay—citing the area(s) in which each is
pre-eminent. Of these, 22 of his 40 foremost monk disciples and three of his ten
foremost lay female disciples appear in the Ud›na (see Appendix Four). In five
ud›nas we actually get to see the events—or examples of the events—that led
the Buddha to single these individuals out for praise: Ven. Mah› Kassapa’s
practice of strictness in 1:6 and 3:7; B›hiya’s quick awakening in 1:10; Ven.
Moggallana’s psychic acuity in 4:4; Ven. So˚a’s fine recitation in 5:6; and
Suppav›s›’s gift of meals in 2:8. In other cases, the Buddha gives his prominent
disciples more general praise; and in others, we simply get to see these disciples
in action.
    As we noted above, the most frequent instigation for the Buddha’s
exclamations is in celebration of his disciples’ attainments. So it is only fitting that
many of his foremost disciples appear in the collection, lending a sense of
heightened occasion to the narrated events. But what adds a more genuine touch
of the astounding to the savor of the text is the way in which their stories are
handled. This is apparent in the treatment both of the monks and of the female
lay disciples.
    It would have been all too easy for the compilers of the Ud›na simply to bask
in the reflected glory of the pre-eminent monks as a way of advertising their
own worth as a field of merit. And, admittedly, an air of competitiveness with
rival sectarians pervades the collection, with the support and respect accorded to
the Saºgha frequently contrasted with the lack of support accorded to other
sects. There is also the strong contrast between the noble and heroic behavior of
the pre-eminent monks and the way in which other sectarians are made to look
petty (2:4), ridiculous (6:4), ignorant (6:10), and vile (4:8).
    However, that’s not all there is to the treatment, for not all the monks are
portrayed in a flattering light. In fact, there are more ud›nas focused on the
misbehavior of monks than there are on the misbehavior of rival sectarians.
Thus the simple fact that a monk is a member of the Saºgha does not mean that
he is automatically worthy of admiration. The text sets an extremely high
standard for what makes a person a true monk. In this way it portrays an ideal
toward which the monks should strive, at the same time informing the laity of
how to judge who is truly worthy of their respect.
                                                                                 17


     A similar impressive maturity is found in the treatment of the stories of Lady
Vis›kh› and Suppav›s›, both of whom the Buddha cited for their pre-eminence
in giving material support to the Saºgha. It would have been easy for the
compilers to focus simply on their generosity—or the pleasant rewards of their
generosity—as a way of encouraging the generosity of others. Had they done
so, it would have confirmed the common stereotype that monks see women
only in the role of donors. But that’s not how the text treats these women at all.
Both are portrayed as suffering—from the pains (2:8) and sorrows (8:8) of family
life, and from disappointment in business dealings (2:9)—a fair warning that
generosity to the Saºgha is not always quickly rewarded. And the Buddha’s
attitude toward both is admirable. Instead of sweet-talking them into even more
generosity or humoring their weaknesses, he chides them for their heedlessness:
somewhat gently in Lady Vis›kh›’s case; startlingly abrupt in Suppav›s›’s. This
shows that his main concern was with their true welfare, and in particular with
showing them that they shouldn’t fall prey to society’s demand that they look
for their primary happiness in bearing and raising children.
     In this way the Ud›na’s cast of characters lends the savor of the astounding to
the collection not only in the eminence of the individuals, but also in the mature
way in which their stories are treated.
     A touch of the astounding flavors the collection’s treatment not only of the
Saºgha but also of the Dhamma. Although a few specific Dhamma teachings are
explained (as in 4:1, 6:2, and 8:6), most of the standard teachings, such as the four
noble truths or the five aggregates, are not even mentioned. The few standard
lists that are mentioned are complex and presented as unexplained lists. The
collection opens (1:1-3) with an unadorned statement of what the Buddha called
his deepest and most complex teaching—dependent co-arising—completely
devoid of preparation or explanation. The seven lists in the wings to awakening
are mentioned, again without explanation, in 5:5, where they are described
simply as amazing and astounding. The complexity of kamma (action) is touched
on in 4:3, 5:2, and 5:3, but never really clarified. And two particularly abstruse
topics of meditation are mentioned—again without explanation—in 7:7 and 7:8.
The only detailed meditation instructions given in the collection are those the
Buddha teaches to B›hiya in 1:10, but from the context these are clearly
appropriate only for a person on the verge of awakening. There is no
explanation of how an aspiring meditator should practice to attain that advanced
level. All of this gives the impression that the compilers of the Ud›na were
interested less in clarifying the techniques of Dhamma practice than in conveying
a sense of how astounding and marvelous they are.
     The text also makes use of poetic figures (alaºk›ra) to intensify the astounding
savor. I have commented on some of the more technical figures in the notes to
individual ud›nas. Here I would like to focus on two of the most prominent
figures in the collection as a whole: paradox and contrast.
     Paradox augments the astounding savor by surprising the reader. Some of
the paradoxes in the Ud›na deal in imagery, such as the observations that people
are not cleaned by water (1:9) and that rain soddens what is concealed, but not
what is left open (5:5). Other paradoxes deal on the level of ideas, such as the
                                                                                      18


assertion that self-love is the basis of compassion (5:1, 5:4), or that release from
becoming is achieved neither through becoming nor non-becoming (3:10). The
deepest use of paradox, however, deals with the fact that unbinding, the goal of
the practice, lies beyond the dichotomies inherent in human thought and
language. Thus 8:10, while stating that the destination of the arahant after death
cannot be described, characterizes it as unwavering bliss. This, in turn, seems to
contradict 1:10, which describes it as freedom from bliss and pain. The verses in
6:3 and 8:2 suggest that unbinding is more like a nothing, whereas 8:1 suggests
that it is a something. The exclamation in 8:1 also states that unbinding cannot be
described either as a staying or a moving. The exclamation in 8:4 asserts that it
doesn’t fall into the categories of here, there, or between the two, echoing a
point from the Buddha’s instructions in 1:10. All of these paradoxes serve notice
that ultimate freedom is something that defies even the most basic categories of
thought.
    There is also an element of paradox in the way the Ud›na reverses the
conventional values of domestic society. Because the brahmans of the time were
vociferously advancing the idea that they were superior to others because of
their birth—the ancient Indian form of racism—there’s a certain amount of shock
value in the fact that the collection opens with a series of exclamations that
redefine how a person becomes a brahman—not through birth, but through the
cultivation of the mind (1:4-6, 1:9). Similarly, there is an implicit reversal of
conventional domestic ideas of happiness as the collection repeatedly makes the
point that loved ones, sensuality, power, and responsibilities actually bring
misery, whereas the highest bliss lies in being unpossessive to the point of
abandoning the conceit, “I am” (2:1, 4:1, 6:6, 7:1). Perhaps the most shocking
rejection of domestic values is in 1:8, where the Buddha praises Ven. Saºg›maji
for not even looking at his little son.
    Because the paradoxes concerning unbinding might seem nonsensical on the
surface, and because the frequent rejection of domestic values goes against the
grain, the collection makes heavy use of contrast to emphasize the point that
things are not always what they seem. This contrast is most prominent in the
story of the false ascetics in 6:2, in the famous story of the blind men and the
elephant in 6:4, and in the contrast between Ven. Bhaddiya the Dwarf’s physical
appearance and the description of his mind as a beautiful chariot in 7:5.
However, the contrast between appearance and reality plays a role in many
other ud›nas as well, such as 2:7, 2:8, 2:10, 3:2, 3:6, 3:7, 4:1, 4:8, 5:3, 5:5, 7:1, 7:2,
7:10, 8:5, and 8:7. These contrasts help to make concrete the point that
paradoxical teachings should not be rejected because of surface contradictions,
for they may speak of a level of experience that is not below logic but above and
beyond it.
    The contrasts in the Ud›na occur not only within individual ud›nas but also
between them. This higher level of contrast occurs frequently throughout the
text, but most strikingly in chapters two and eight. In chapter two—which is
devoted to the topic of pleasure and bliss—five of the stories, 2:5-9, focus on the
actual miseries inherent in the supposed joys of lay life: having children and
engaging in business affairs. These are then sharply contrasted with the story of
                                                                                   19


Ven. Bhaddiya in 2:10, who rejoices in the joys of living at the root of a tree and
his release from the worries of kingship.
    There’s a similar strong contrast in chapter eight. The story of Ven.
N›gasam›la in 8:7, suffering for not following the Buddha’s choice of which path
to take—a story that is surely meant to have symbolic overtones—contrasts
strongly with the preceding ud›na, in which the monks who follow the Buddha
are carried by his psychic power effortlessly over the flooding river. Similarly,
the story of Lady Vis›kh›, mourning the death of her grandchild in 8:8, contrasts
with the following ud›na, in which Ven. Dabba Mallaputta voluntarily heads for
death with a final display of his psychic powers. In this way, the astounding
savor of these psychic displays is augmented by contrasting them so directly
with ordinary mundane human failings.
    In fact, the formal nature of the ud›na genre, focused on the Buddha’s
exclamations, seems designed to emphasize this element of contrast. As we have
seen, when the Buddha exclaims, it is usually from one of two strongly
contrasting emotions: saªvega and pas›da. Because of the strong contrast
between these two emotions, the act of collecting stories around these
exclamations naturally heightens the savor of the astounding by placing them in
sharp contrast with one another.
    And there are other ways in which the formal structure of the Ud›na helps to
convey the savor of the astounding. For example, in 8:5 the story of the
Buddha’s final illness is told in a combination of prose and epic-like verse, a form
called the campÒ, which heightens the sense of the importance of the events.
Because, chronologically, this is the last story in the collection, leading up to the
Buddha’s final exclamation, this heightened style adds to the solemnity of the
narrative.
    Then there is the basic format of each ud›na text. As we have noted, each
narrative ends with the formula (or a close variation of it): “Then, on realizing the
significance/meaning (attha) of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed.” This
formula assigns the Buddha’s exclamations to two categories of poetry explained
in a discourse elsewhere in the Pali Canon (AN 4:231—4:230 in the Pali Text
Society (PTS) version):
      “Monks, there are these four kinds of poets. Which four? The thought-
   poet, the heard-poet, the meaning (attha)-poet, and the extemporaneous
   poet. These are the four kinds of poets.”
    The discourse doesn’t explain these four, but the Commentary notes that the
thought-poet invents stories, the heard-poet retells old legends, the meaning-
poet gets to the meaning of things, and the extemporaneous poet comes up with
a new poem on the spot.
    Of the four, the meaning-poet and the extemporaneous poet require the
most skill, and to combine these two skills is a sign of genuine accomplishment: a
level of accomplishment that the ud›na formula assigns directly to the Buddha.
In calling his statements “exclamations,” the formula asserts that his remarks
were extemporaneous; in stating that they were inspired by his understanding of
the significance/meaning of the event, the formula categorizes him as a
                                                                                20


meaning-poet. And he is able to find meaning not only in extraordinary events,
but also in some of the most ordinary imaginable: boys hitting a snake with a
stick (2:3), men fighting over a woman (6:8), women wanting more children and
grandchildren (2:8, 8:8). The Buddha’s ability to combine these two skills in this
way, grasping the meaning and expressing it memorably on the spur of the
moment, is—from a strictly literary point of view—one of the most astounding
aspects of the ud›na texts.
    This, in turn, relates to one of the most basic features of the ud›na genre: the
fact that the Buddha plays a double role in all of these pieces, both as a character
in the stories and as the author of the comments on the stories. The way the
compilers handle the stories—both in the choice and organization of events, and
in their use of literary technique to foster the astounding savor—capitalizes on
this double role in two ways.
    The first, of course, is to help clarify the Buddha’s exclamations, showing
what led him to exclaim in the way he did. The second is to give his exclamations
more credence and weight. As a character in the stories, he is shown to be
capable and upright: a person of reliable character who has mastered an amazing
range of skills and who has trained others to become skilled as well, capable of
finding an amazingly satisfying happiness. Thus when he states values that go
against common social norms, he is not to be dismissed as someone who has
failed to live up to social standards. He has seen the limitations of those
standards by developing an integrity and a range of skills that go beyond them.
Similarly, as a partial author of the text, he is shown to be extremely capable in
expressing what he has to say. Thus, when he states that unbinding lies beyond
the structures of language, it’s not because he is deficient in his mastery of
language. It’s because he knows, through a high level of mastery, the limits of
precisely how far language can go.
    In this way, the ud›na genre helps give extra meaning to the Buddha’s
exclamations in two senses of the term: “meaning” in the sense of helping to
explain what the words signify, and “meaning” in the sense of having value for
the reader. Of course, the fact that the compilers of the Ud›na were skilled with
words does not prove that the values they promote actually do lead to an
unfettered freedom beyond the values of words and social norms. The ultimate
test of the meaning of the ud›nas for you will lie in your own practice: your
willingness to learn the techniques of the practice from other parts of the Canon
and from reliable members of the Saºgha, and to apply them in your thoughts,
words, and deeds. But my hope is that the act of reading the Ud›na will help
convince you that there is value in giving the Buddha’s teachings a fair try.


                        O N R E A D I N G T H E U D fi N A

    The Ud›na’s focus on communicating values to revolutionize the heart and
mind of the reader is precisely where it runs up against modern and postmodern
attitudes toward finding meaning in a text. Because these attitudes are so
entrenched in our culture, and because they are cited so often not only in
                                                                                21


scholarly circles but also among Buddhist practitioners, it’s worth asking how
useful they are when reading texts—like the Pali Canon in general, and the
Ud›na in particular—that offer guidance on how to attain total freedom. Because
both modern and postmodern attitudes toward reading claim to be aiming at
freedom for the reader, we need to look carefully at how the types of freedom
they offer measure up against the freedom taught in the Pali Canon, to see
whether—if you adopt them—they enhance or interfere with the benefits that
can come from the act of reading these records of the Buddha’s words.
     Modern ways of reading approach pre-modern texts by asking questions first
about the texts’ historical reliability. In the case of the Ud›na, these would cover
whether ud›nas really were memorized during the Buddha’s lifetime and, if so,
how they were related to the Ud›na we have at present. Were his words
memorized accurately? Are the stories associated with his words accurate
accounts? Could they actually have happened?
     Questions of this sort can be fruitfully explored in one of two ways: by
finding reliable evidence outside of a particular text against which to measure its
reliability, or by searching for inconsistencies or improbabilities within the text
itself. What makes this approach “modern” is that it subjects the text to the
standards of materialistic empiricism established in the Enlightenment of the
eighteenth century and further developed in the historical method of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Its purpose is to free us in the present from
the irrational and ignorant superstitions of the pre-modern world.
     This approach is useful when applied to texts whose historical context is well
documented from other sources, and it has succeeded in exposing the weak and
arbitrary foundations for many a pre-modern system of thought. But it’s
relatively fruitless when applied to the Ud›na. To begin with, there are no
outside contemporary accounts against which the history of the Pali Canon can
be measured. As for internal inconsistencies, those that occur in the various
recensions of the Ud›na and parallel passages elsewhere in the Canon are all so
minor that they do not affect the basic meaning of the text.
     The text does, however, contain many elements that, from a modern
materialist point of view, are highly improbable. A good number of the stories
revolve around meditative powers, some of them quite extravagant, and a
strictly modern reading would reject them out of hand. Many of the values
expressed in the Buddha’s exclamations fly in the face of a materialist view of life
and death. To strip the text of these elements might satisfy a modern reader, but
would leave very little behind.
     And why should the narrow views of modern materialism—the views of
those with little expertise in meditation—have the final word on what can and
cannot be achieved through the training of the mind? Even the physical sciences
of recent times are filled with discoveries about physical and chemical events that
are deeply counter-intuitive; the study of non-linear systems shows that the
complex interaction of even physical laws can lead to highly unlikely
singularities. And that’s just in the physical sciences. There’s even more that we
still don’t know about the complex workings of the mind. If we allow ourselves
to be tyrannized by the likely—and if we define “likely” in line with the views of
                                                                                22


those who lack meditative prowess—we close our minds to the possibility of the
singular. There are many useful things we will never be open to learn.
    This would not be a problem if the modern approach could provide a
freedom equal to or greater than the freedom to which the Ud›na points. You
could simply ignore the Ud›na and other texts in the Pali Canon, and still gain
liberation. But the problem is that the modern approach leaves us trapped in our
historically conditioned assumptions about what seems reasonable and likely.
    The Romantics recognized this trap and rebelled against it, and postmodern
theory continues this rebellion. Yet despite their quest for freedom, these two
approaches, too, work against allowing the values of a text like the Ud›na to
have a truly revolutionary effect on the heart and mind. This is because each, in
its own way, places the reader’s pre-existing values over and above any values
that might be absorbed from a text.
    Their rationales for doing so, however, are quite different. The Romantics—
and the American Transcendentalists who followed them—posited a common
source of inspiration within the deepest part of each person. According to them,
authors and readers throughout time have had access within to the same source
of inspiration. To understand which meanings within an ancient text might have
value in our day and age, we need only check the text against the original source
deep in our own minds. Wherever the author’s expression differs from this inner
sense of inspiration, it can simply be rejected as no longer relevant. Whatever
resonates with this inner sense of inspiration can be accepted as trustworthy and
true.
    This approach, however, leaves no room for the possibility that a person like
the Buddha could have realized truths about experience that are not already
available to the reader. In other words—contrary to a basic principle of the
Buddha’s teaching—there was nothing special or singular about the Buddha’s
awakening. The only teachings of any value derived from that awakening are
those that agree with what the reader already feels deep down inside to be true.
There is nothing really new to be learned from the Ud›na or from any Buddhist
text. The only reason to read them is to confirm what we already know.
    The postmodern approach leads to a similar conclusion but via a different
route, for it denies the existence of any common inner source of meaning.
Instead, it maintains that authors and readers can know nothing but the
arbitrary systems of values to which they have been exposed at their point in
history—systems that are inherently suspect because they are created and
propagated by social structures of power. (This postmodern theory is called
poststructuralism because it arose in reaction to structuralism, the theory that the
structures of human thought are innate to the human mind.) Thus, from this
point of view, a fully reliable source of meaning is nowhere to be found. As a
result, postmodern ways of reading a text—although they start with the
Romantic realization that modern ways of reading can’t produce the freedom
they promise—tend to be even less willing than the modern or Romantic
approach to be changed by the values expressed in any text.
    This attitude is most often based on an observation from poststructuralist
theory: that a text—regardless of the conscious intentions of the author—may be
                                                                               23


the product of a structure of meanings and values inherent in language that is
oppressive to the reader, no matter how rational or objective it may seem.
Freedom from that oppression can be maintained only by digging up and
exposing those structures, and by reading the text in a way that is resistant to
those values. From this observation comes the argument that the most liberating
way to read a text is to approach it with a sense of suspicion and to create one’s
own meanings—and sometimes one’s own personal language—out of it, and to
ignore whatever the author(s) had in mind. The fact that this approach is applied
even to modern texts is what makes it postmodern. And, just as the modern
approach has exposed the arbitrary foundations of oppressive patterns of
thought in pre-modern texts and institutions, the postmodern approach has
done the same for many seemingly rational but oppressive patterns in texts and
institutions from the modern period.
     It can, however, fall into the trap of the poststructuralist paradox: that the
reader’s own values and reading of a text may be shaped unconsciously by
structures that are equally—if not more—oppressive than the unconscious
values expressed in the text. Thus a suspicious reading of a text may often leave
the reader more entrenched in his/her own preexisting state of oppression than
before. And, in fact, poststructuralist theory holds little hope that a human being
could ever gain freedom from value structures. Meanings, it insists, point only to
other systems of meanings, which in turn point to other systems of meanings, ad
infinitum, never arriving at any experience in-and-of-itself. Thus the quest for
liberation is an always on-going process doomed never fully to succeed.
     Never. This is where poststructuralist values depart most radically from the
Dhamma. Although there is a recent fashion to apply poststructuralist theory to
the act of reading and interpreting the Pali Canon, it’s hard to imagine a system
of values more at odds with what the Buddha, as portrayed in the Canon, had to
say: that total freedom is possible, that strategies of values and practice can be
used to reach it—at which point they are put aside—and that the teachings
contained in the Canon are among those strategies. Anyone who is content to
regard total freedom as an impossibility and would prefer to hold to a
postmodern identity is free to maintain a poststructuralist attitude to the Canon.
But if you’d like to test to see if the Buddha was right, you have to bring a
different attitude and set of assumptions to the act of reading the Canon’s
message.
     Fortunately, the Pali Canon is not a text like the Bible, demanding total,
unquestioning acceptance. It assumes the authority, not of your creator who has
the right to tell you what and what not to believe, but of an expert, someone
who has found the way to total freedom and offers to show how you can find
that freedom yourself.
     The primary working hypothesis when testing this expert’s teaching is that
total freedom is possible. Thus, contrary to poststructuralist theory, you have to
assume that some experiences are not embedded in structures of meaning
created by human minds. This is not that difficult an assumption to make. After
all, there’s physical pain. You don’t need to run pain through an interpretive
structure in order to experience it. You first encountered it well before you knew
                                                                                24


anything of signs or words. However, the Buddha noted that there are two
primary responses to pain—bewilderment and a search for how to put an end to
it (AN 6:63)—and from these responses we tend to develop systems of values
and meanings that, because they are ignorant, lead only to more mental
suffering.
    The second working hypothesis in testing the Buddha’s recommendations for
ending this suffering is this: that the basic pattern underlying any attachment to
these oppressive systems of values and meanings is constant regardless of
culture. In other words, the way we cling to these meanings is the same
regardless of their content or our culture. Otherwise, a path taught to alleviate
suffering in India more than 2,500 years ago would be irrelevant to our problem
of suffering now. Again, the commonality of suffering is not a difficult
assumption to make, for the Buddha’s basic image of how and why we suffer is
the act of feeding, both physically and mentally. This is something common to all
beings, and not just human beings living in social structures. We all suffer from
the need to feed, regardless of how the details of this need are shaped by culture.
    From these two assumptions, we can see precisely what the Buddha asks us
to test: his strategy of feeding the mind in new ways that give it the strength to
reach a dimension where it no longer needs to feed. Part of this strategy is to
adopt skillful structures of value and meaning—called appropriate attention and
right view—that focus on the problem of suffering in a way that dismantles
attachment to unskillful structures and, ultimately, even to themselves. This way
they dismantle all attachment (AN 10:93), leading to a different type of
experience beyond the need to feed, and beyond interpretation: unbinding, total
freedom from any and all conditions.
    This claim means that the texts derive their meaning and value from how
helpful they are in accomplishing this freedom. Because they themselves cannot
provide this liberation for you, but only point out the techniques and values that
can lead there, the test of their validity depends on your actually adopting their
teachings in your actions and then gauging the results. And because the goal to
which they point, freedom from suffering, is something you can potentially
touch directly, the guarantee of their validity lies ultimately in your own honest
experience.
    At the same time, however, the texts do set some conditions on what counts
as a valid test. Even though you’re not asked to accept without question
whatever the Pali texts say, if you’re interested in putting an end to suffering,
you have to develop within yourself the qualities that will make you a
competent judge of their message.
    This will require energy, dedication, and time. And this, in turn, requires a
special attitude toward reading the discourses, approaching them with openness
and respect. In other words, you experiment to see where you are taken by the
working hypothesis that the monks who assembled them knew something of
value and were basically honest in their desire to transmit it to later generations,
you included. The texts recognize that there can be errors of transmission (DN
16), so respect does not mean accepting without question whatever the texts say.
But it does mean giving them the benefit of the doubt until you can meet the
                                                                               25


conditions of a valid test and determine what does and doesn’t actually work in
leading to true freedom.
     A large part of the “something of value” transmitted in the Canon consists of
specific tactics and techniques for training the mind, but it also consists of more
general values and principles. This, as we have noted, is one of the Ud›na’s
functions: to present these values in an appealing and “savorful” way. Yet the
Canon treats even values and principles as actions—attitudes that inform a larger
strategy of practice—which means that they, too, can be tested. Thus, as with all
the texts in the Canon, the act of reading the Ud›na is not meant as an end in and
of itself, as an opportunity to enjoy its astonishing and humorous savor. Instead,
it’s meant as a challenge for you to test whether the values it expresses, when
adopted as working hypotheses, really do lead to the singular and ultimate savor
of the Dhamma (5:5): the savor of release.
                                                                               26




                                     Ud›na
                               Exclamations


      1 : Awakening


   1:1 Awakening (1) (Bodhi Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion, the Blessed One was staying at Uruvel› on
the bank of the Nerañjar› River at the root of the Bodhi tree—the tree of
awakening—newly awakened. And on that occasion he sat at the root of the
Bodhi tree for seven days in one session, sensitive to the bliss of release. Then,
with the passing of seven days, after emerging from that concentration, in the
first watch of the night, he gave close attention to dependent co-arising in
forward order,1 thus:
    When this is, that is.
    From the arising of this comes the arising of that.
In other words:
    From ignorance as a requisite condition come fabrications.
    From fabrications as a requisite condition comes consciousness.
    From consciousness as a requisite condition comes name-&-form.
    From name-&-form as a requisite condition come the six sense media.
    From the six sense media as a requisite condition comes contact.
    From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling.
    From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving.
    From craving as a requisite condition comes clinging/sustenance.2
    From clinging/sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming.
    From becoming as a requisite condition comes birth.
    From birth as a requisite condition, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation,
pain, distress, and despair come into play. Such is the origination of this entire
mass of suffering & stress.3
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      As phenomena grow clear
      to the brahman—ardent, in jh›na—
      his doubts all vanish
      when he discerns
      a phenomenon with its cause.
                                                                                              27




    NO TES
     1. In the parallel passage at Mv.I.1.2, the Buddha gives attention to dependent co-arising in
both forward and reverse order.
     2. This hybrid word—clinging/sustenance—is a translation of the Pali term up›d›na.
Up›d›na has a hybrid meaning because it is used to cover two sides of a physical process
metaphorically applied to the mind: the act of clinging whereby a fire takes sustenance from a
piece of fuel, together with the sustenance offered by the fuel. On the level of the mind, up›d›na
denotes both the act of clinging and the object clung to, which together give sustenance to the
process of becoming and its attendant factors leading to suffering and stress. For more on this
image and its implications for the practice, see The Mind Like Fire Unbound.
     3. Notice that dependent co-arising (pa˛icca samupp›da) is expressed in terms of processes—
of events and actions—without reference to a framework containing those processes. In other
words, it doesn’t mention the existence or non-existence of agents doing the actions, or of a
framework in time and space in which these processes happen. Thus it makes possible a way
of understanding the causes of suffering and stress without reference to the existence or non-
existence of an “I” or an “other” responsible for those events. Instead, the events are viewed
simply as events in the context of the process—a way of viewing that makes it possible to
abandon clinging for any of these events, so as to bring suffering to an end. Even the idea of an
“I” or an “other” is seen simply as part of the process (under the factors of fabrication and the
sub-factor of attention under “name” in name-and-form). This is what makes possible the
abandoning of any attachment to the conceit “I am,” as mentioned in Ud 2:1, 4:1, 6:6, and 7:1. In
this way, the treatment of dependent co-arising in the first three ud›nas, while terse, actually
sets the stage for understanding some of the more paradoxical teachings that appear later in
the collection.
     For a discussion of dependent co-arising in general, see The Shape of Suffering. For further
discussion of its role in framing and abandoning thoughts of “I am,” see Skill in Questions,
chapters 3 and 8.



    1:2 Awakening (2) (Bodhi Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion, the Blessed One was staying at Uruvel› on
the bank of the Nerañjar› River at the root of the Bodhi tree—the tree of
awakening—newly awakened. And on that occasion he sat at the root of the
Bodhi tree for seven days in one session, sensitive to the bliss of release. Then,
with the passing of seven days, after emerging from that concentration, in the
second watch of the night, he gave close attention to dependent co-arising in
reverse order,1 thus:
    When this isn’t, that isn’t.
    From the cessation of this comes the cessation of that.
In other words:
    From the cessation of ignorance comes the cessation of fabrications.
    From the cessation of fabrications comes the cessation of consciousness.
                                                                                              28


    From the cessation of consciousness comes the cessation of name-&-form.
    From the cessation of name-&-form comes the cessation of the six sense
media.
    From the cessation of the six sense media comes the cessation of contact.
    From the cessation of contact comes the cessation of feeling.
    From the cessation of feeling comes the cessation of craving.
    From the cessation of craving comes the cessation of clinging/sustenance.
    From the cessation of clinging/sustenance comes the cessation of becoming.
    From the cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth.
    From the cessation of birth, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
distress, and despair all cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering
& stress.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        As phenomena grow clear
        to the brahman—ardent, in jh›na—
        his doubts all vanish
        when he penetrates the ending
        of requisite conditions.


    N O T E : 1. In the parallel passage at Mv.I.1.4, the Buddha gives attention to dependent co-
arising in both forward and reverse order.



    1:3 Awakening (3) (Bodhi Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion, the Blessed One was staying at Uruvel› on
the bank of the Nerañjar› River at the root of the Bodhi tree—the tree of
awakening—newly awakened. And on that occasion he sat at the root of the
Bodhi tree for seven days in one session, sensitive to the bliss of release. Then,
with the passing of seven days, after emerging from that concentration, in the
third watch of the night, he gave close attention to dependent co-arising in
forward and reverse order, thus:
    When this is, that is.
    From the arising of this comes the arising of that.
    When this isn’t, that isn’t.
    From the cessation of this comes the cessation of that.
In other words:
    From ignorance as a requisite condition come fabrications.
    From fabrications as a requisite condition comes consciousness.
    From consciousness as a requisite condition comes name-&-form.
    From name-&-form as a requisite condition come the six sense media.
    From the six sense media as a requisite condition comes contact.
                                                                                            29


    From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling.
    From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving.
    From craving as a requisite condition comes clinging/sustenance.
    From clinging/sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming.
    From becoming as a requisite condition comes birth.
    From birth as a requisite condition, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation,
pain, distress, and despair come into play. Such is the origination of this entire
mass of suffering & stress.
    Now from the remainderless fading and cessation of that very ignorance
comes the cessation of fabrications. From the cessation of fabrications comes the
cessation of consciousness. From the cessation of consciousness comes the
cessation of name-&-form. From the cessation of name-&-form comes the
cessation of the six sense media. From the cessation of the six sense media comes
the cessation of contact. From the cessation of contact comes the cessation of
feeling. From the cessation of feeling comes the cessation of craving. From the
cessation of craving comes the cessation of clinging/ sustenance. From the
cessation of clinging/sustenance comes the cessation of becoming. From the
cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth. From the cessation of birth,
then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, and despair all cease.
Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering & stress.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        As phenomena grow clear
        to the brahman—ardent, in jh›na—
        he stands,
               routing M›ra’s army,
        as the sun,
               illumining the sky.1


     N O T E : 1. This verse is an example of a “lamp”—a poetic figure in which one word, such
as an adjective or a verb, functions in two or more different clauses or sentences. The name of
the figure comes from the image of the different clauses or sentences “radiating” from the one
word. In this case the lamp-word is “stands.” For other examples of lamps, see Ud 5:3 and Ud
8:9.




    1:4 Overbearing (Huhuºka Sutta)

   I have heard that on one occasion, the Blessed One was staying at Uruvel› on
the bank of the Nerañjar› River at the root of the Bodhi tree—the tree of
awakening—newly awakened. And on that occasion he sat at the root of the
Bodhi tree for seven days in one session, sensitive to the bliss of release. At the
end of seven days, he emerged from that concentration.
                                                                                              30


   Then a certain overbearing brahman went to the Blessed One and, on arrival,
exchanged courteous greetings with him. After an exchange of friendly greetings
& courtesies, he stood to one side. As he was standing there, he said to the
Blessed One, “To what extent, Master Gotama, is one a brahman? And which are
the qualities that make one a brahman?”
   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Any brahman
        who has banished evil qualities,1
           —not overbearing,
           not stained,
           his mind controlled—
        gone to the end of wisdom,2
        the holy life completed:3
        Rightly would that brahman
        speak the holy teaching.
           He has no swelling of pride4
           anywhere in the world.


    NO TES
   1. This line contains a wordplay on the words br›hma˚a and b›hita (banished)—the same
wordplay used in Dhp 388 and Ud 1:5.
   2. This line plays with the term vedanta, which can mean “end of wisdom,” “end of the
Vedas,” or “supplement to the Vedas.” In the latter two cases, it would be a term referring to a
brahman-by-birth who has studied all the Vedas and their supplements, but the Buddha is
obviously giving this term a different meaning here.
   3. Here and two lines down, the word “holy” translates brahma.
   4. See Sn 4:10 and Sn 4:14.




    1:5 Brahmans (Br›hma˚a Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. S›riputta,
Ven. Mah› Moggal›na, Ven. Mah› Kassapa, Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana, Ven. Mah›
Ko˛˛hita, Ven. Mah› Kappina, Ven. Mah› Cunda, Ven. Anuruddha, Ven. Revata,
and Ven. Nanda1 went to the Blessed One. The Blessed One saw them coming
from afar and, on seeing them, addressed the monks, “Monks, those are
brahmans who are coming. Monks, those are brahmans who are coming.”
    When this was said, a certain monk who was a brahman by birth said to the
Blessed One, “To what extent, lord, is one a brahman? And which are the
qualities that make one a brahman?”
                                                                                          31


   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Having banished evil qualities,2
       those who go about ever mindful,
       awakened, their fetters ended:
          They, in the world,
          are truly brahmans.


   NO TES
    1. This translation follows the Thai and Burmese versions of this passage. The Sri Lankan
version replaces Ven. Nanda in this list with Ven. finanda; the PTS version replaces him with
Ven. Devadatta and Ven. finanda. These latter two readings would appear to be mistaken, as
the Buddha in this sutta defines “brahman” as one whose fetters are ended—i.e., an arahant—
whereas Ven. finanda became an arahant only after the Buddha’s passing; Devadatta, after
having caused a split in the Saºgha toward the end of the Buddha’s life, fell into hell.
    2. This line contains a wordplay on the words br›hma˚a and b›hita (banished)—the same
wordplay used in Dhp 388 and Ud 1:4.



   1:6 Mah› Kassapa (Kassapa Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near R›jagaha
at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. And on that occasion Ven. Mah›
Kassapa was staying at the Pipphali Cave, afflicted, in pain, & seriously ill. Then,
at a later time, he recovered from his illness. When he had recovered from the
illness, the thought occurred to him: “What if I were to go into R›jagaha for
alms?”
    Now on that occasion 500 devat›s were in a state of eagerness for the chance
to give alms to Ven. Mah› Kassapa. But Ven. Mah› Kassapa, turning down those
500 devat›s, early in the morning adjusted his under robe1 and—carrying his
bowl & robes—went into R›jagaha for alms along the streets of the poor, the
streets of the indigent, the streets of the weavers. The Blessed One saw that Ven.
Mah› Kassapa had gone into R›jagaha for alms along the streets of the poor, the
streets of the indigent, the streets of the weavers.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Supporting no others,
              unknown,2
       tamed, established
       in what is essential,
       effluents ended,
       anger disgorged:
                                                                                             32


                He’s what I call
                a brahman.


    NO TES
    1. According to the protocols given in Cv.VIII, a monk leaving a monastery in the
wilderness with the purpose of going for alms would wear just his under robe, while carrying
his upper and outer robes folded over his shoulder or upper back. On approaching an
inhabited area he would stop and make sure that his under robe was neatly arranged:
covering the area from above his navel to below his knees, and hanging down evenly in front
and behind. Then he would put on his upper and outer robe, arranged so that the upper robe
was a lining for the outer robe. If he was wearing sandals, he would take them off and place
them in a small cloth bag. Only then would he enter the inhabited area for alms.
    2. There is an alliterative play of words here on anañña (no others) and aññ›ta (unknown).




    1:7 Aja (Aja Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near P›va at
the Ajakal›paka [Herd-of-Goats] shrine, the dwelling of the Ajakal›paka spirit.
And on that occasion, in the pitch-black darkness of the night, the Blessed One
was sitting in the open air, and the rain was falling in scattered drops.
    Then the Ajakal›paka spirit—wanting to cause fear, terror, & horripilation in
the Blessed One—went to him and, on arrival, not far from him, three times
made a commotion & pandemonium: “Commotion & pandemonium!
Commotion & pandemonium! Commotion & pandemonium!—That’s a goblin
for you, contemplative!”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        When,
        with regard to his own qualities,1
        a brahman is one
        who has gone beyond,
        he transcends this goblin
        and his pandemonium.


    N O T E : 1. Dhammas. This is apparently a reference to skillful and unskillful mental
qualities—which would mean that this sutta sides with the passages in the Canon categorizing
unbinding not as a dhamma, but as the transcending of all dhammas. (The suttas in general
are inconsistent on this point. Iti 90, among others, states clearly that unbinding counts as a
dhamma. AN 10:58, on the other hand, calls unbinding the ending of all dhammas. Sn 5:6 calls
the attainment of the goal the transcending of all dhammas, just as Sn 4:6 and Sn 4:10 state that
                                                                                           33


the arahant has transcended dispassion, said to be the highest dhamma. MN 22, in the famous
simile of the raft, states that all dhammas are abandoned at the end of the path.)




   1:8 Saºg›maji (Saºg›maji Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven.
Saºg›maji had arrived in S›vatthı to see the Blessed One. His former wife heard,
“Master Saºg›maji, they say, has arrived in S›vatthı.” Taking her small child, she
went to Jeta’s Grove. On that occasion Ven. Saºg›maji was sitting at the root of a
tree for the day’s abiding. His former wife went to him and, on arrival, said to
him, “Look after me, contemplative—(a woman) with a little son.” When this
was said, Ven. Saºg›maji remained silent. A second time… A third time, his
former wife said to him, “Look after me, contemplative—(a woman) with a little
son.” A third time, Ven. Saºg›maji remained silent.
    Then his former wife, taking the baby and leaving him in front of Ven.
Saºg›maji, went away, saying, “That’s your son, contemplative. Look after
him.”
    Then Ven. Saºg›maji neither looked at the child nor spoke to him. His wife,
after going not far away, was looking back and saw Ven. Saºg›maji neither
looking at the child nor speaking to him. On seeing this, the thought occurred to
her, “The contemplative doesn’t even care about his son.” Returning from there
and taking the child, she left.
    The Blessed One—with his divine eye, purified and surpassing the human—
saw Ven. Saºg›maji’s former wife misbehaving in that way.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       At her coming,
           he didn’t delight;
       at her leaving,
           he didn’t grieve.
       A victor in battle, freed from the tie:1
           He’s what I call
           a brahman.


    N O T E : 1. This line is a double wordplay on Saºg›maji’s name. Literally, it means a
victor in battle—a compound of saºg›ma (battle) and -ji (victor)—but the Buddha also extracts
from the first member of the compound the word saºg›, which means “from the tie.” Strictly
speaking, saºg›ma and saºg› are not related to each other. The ability to engage in wordplay
using unrelated words like this was considered a sign of intelligence and wit.

   See also: Dhp 345–346
                                                                                         34




   1:9 Ascetics (Ja˛ila Sutta)

   I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Gay› at
Gay› Head. And on that occasion, many ascetics—on the cold winter nights of
the “Between-the-Eights,”1 when the snow was falling in Gay›—jumped up in
the water, jumped down in the water, did a jumping-up-&-down in the water,
poured (water over themselves), and performed the fire sacrifice, (thinking,)
“Through this there is purity.”
   The Blessed One saw those many ascetics—on the cold winter nights of the
“Between-the-Eights,” when the snow was falling in Gay›—jumping up in the
water, jumping down in the water, doing a jumping-up-&-down in the water,
pouring (water over themselves), and performing the fire sacrifice, (thinking,)
“Through this there is purity.”
   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Not by water is one clean,
       though many people are bathing here.
       Whoever has truth
       & rectitude:
              He’s a clean one;
              he, a brahman.2


   NO TES
    1. The “Eights” are the waning half-moon days (each on the eighth day of the waning
cycle) after three of the full moons in the cold season. These are the dates of brahmanical
ceremonies for making merit for the dead. The period between the first and last of these
dates—the “Between-the-Eights”—is regarded in northern India as the coldest part of the year.
See AN 3:35.
    2. The last half of this verse is identical with the last half of Dhp 393.




   1:10 B›hiya (B›hiya Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion B›hiya of the
Bark-cloth was living in Supp›raka by the seashore. He was worshipped,
revered, honored, venerated, and given homage—a recipient of robes, alms
food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. Then, when he was alone in
                                                                               35


seclusion, this line of thinking appeared to his awareness: “Now, of those who in
this world are arahants or have entered the path of arahantship, am I one?”
    Then a devat› who had once been a blood relative of B›hiya of the Bark-
cloth—compassionate, desiring his welfare, knowing with her own awareness
the line of thinking that had arisen in his awareness—went to him and on arrival
said to him, “You, B›hiya, are neither an arahant nor have you entered the path
of arahantship. You don’t even have the practice whereby you would become an
arahant or enter the path of arahantship.”
    “Then who, in this world with its devas, are arahants or have entered the
path to arahantship?”
    “B›hiya, there is a city in the northern country named S›vatthı. There the
Blessed One—an arahant, rightly self-awakened—is living now. He truly is an
arahant and teaches the Dhamma leading to arahantship.”
    Then B›hiya, deeply chastened by the devat›, left Supp›raka right then and,
in the space of one night,1 went all the way to where the Blessed One was staying
near S›vatthı at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. Now on that occasion,
a large number of monks were doing walking meditation in the open air. He
went to them and, on arrival, said, “Where, venerable sirs, is the Blessed One—
the arahant, rightly self-awakened—now staying? We want to see that Blessed
One—the arahant, rightly self-awakened.”
    “The Blessed One has gone into town for alms.”
    Then B›hiya, hurriedly leaving Jeta’s Grove and entering S›vatthı, saw the
Blessed One going for alms in S›vatthı—serene & inspiring serene confidence,
calming, his senses at peace, his mind at peace, having attained the utmost
tranquility & poise, tamed, guarded, his senses restrained, a Great One (n›ga).
Seeing him, he approached the Blessed One and, on reaching him, threw himself
down, with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, and said, “Teach me the Dhamma,
O Blessed One! Teach me the Dhamma, O One-Well-Gone, that will be for my
long-term welfare & bliss.”
    When this was said, the Blessed One said to him, “This is not the time, B›hiya.
We have entered the town for alms.”
    A second time, B›hiya said to the Blessed One, “But it is hard to know for
sure what dangers there may be for the Blessed One’s life, or what dangers there
may be for mine. Teach me the Dhamma, O Blessed One! Teach me the
Dhamma, O One-Well-Gone, that will be for my long-term welfare & bliss.”
    A second time, the Blessed One said to him, “This is not the time, B›hiya. We
have entered the town for alms.”
    A third time, B›hiya said to the Blessed One, “But it is hard to know for sure
what dangers there may be for the Blessed One’s life, or what dangers there may
be for mine. Teach me the Dhamma, O Blessed One! Teach me the Dhamma, O
One-Well-Gone, that will be for my long-term welfare & bliss.”
    “Then, B›hiya, you should train yourself thus: In reference to the seen, there
will be only the seen. In reference to the heard, only the heard. In reference to
the sensed, only the sensed. In reference to the cognized, only the cognized. That
is how you should train yourself. When for you there will be only the seen in
reference to the seen, only the heard in reference to the heard, only the sensed in
                                                                                               36


reference to the sensed, only the cognized in reference to the cognized, then,
B›hiya, there is no you in connection with that. When there is no you in
connection with that, there is no you there. When there is no you there, you are
neither here nor yonder nor between the two. This, just this, is the end of
stress.”2
    Through hearing this brief explanation of the Dhamma from the Blessed One,
the mind of B›hiya of the Bark-cloth right then and there was released from
effluents through lack of clinging/sustenance. Having exhorted B›hiya of the
Bark-cloth with this brief explanation of the Dhamma, the Blessed One left.
    Now, not long after the Blessed One’s departure, B›hiya was attacked &
killed by a cow with a young calf. Then the Blessed One, having gone for alms in
S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from his alms round with a large number of
monks, saw that B›hiya had died. On seeing him, he said to the monks, “Take
B›hiya’s body, monks, and, placing it on a litter and carrying it away, cremate it
and build him a memorial. Your companion in the holy life has died.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, the monks—placing
B›hiya’s body on a litter, carrying it away, cremating it, and building him a
memorial—went to the Blessed One. On arrival, having bowed down to him, sat
to one side. As they were sitting there, they said to him, “B›hiya’s body has been
cremated, lord, and his memorial has been built. What is his destination? What is
his future state?”
    “Monks, B›hiya of the Bark-cloth was wise. He practiced the Dhamma in
accordance with the Dhamma and did not pester me with issues related to the
Dhamma. B›hiya of the Bark-cloth, monks, is totally unbound.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Where water, earth,
        fire, & wind
        have no footing:
        There the stars don’t shine,
                the sun isn’t visible.
        There the moon doesn’t appear.
        There darkness is not found.
        And when a sage,
                a brahman through sagacity,
                has realized [this] for himself,
        then from form & formless,
                from bliss & pain,
                       he is freed.


    NO TES
   1. Eka-ratti-pariv›sena: This phrase can also mean, “taking one-night sojourns” (i.e., resting
no more than one night in any one spot); or “with a one-night sojourn.” The Commentary
                                                                                             37


prefers the meaning used in the translation, noting that the distance between Supp›raka and
S›vatthı amounts to 120 leagues, or approximately 1,200 miles. In its version of B›hiya’s story,
B›hiya had no meditative attainments at all, and so the miraculous speed of his journey had to
be attributed either to the power of the deva or the power of the Buddha. However, he may
actually have had strong powers of concentration with some attendant psychic powers of his
own.
    2. For a discussion of these instructions, see the article, “Food for Awakening: The Role of
Appropriate Attention.”




        2 : Muccalinda


    2:1 Muccalinda (Muccalinda Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion, the Blessed One was staying at Uruvel› on
the bank of the Nerañjar› River at the root of the Muccalinda tree, newly
awakened. And on that occasion he sat for seven days in one session, sensitive to
the bliss of release.
    And on that occasion a great, out-of-season storm-cloud rose up, with seven
days of rainy weather, cold winds, & intense darkness. Then Muccalinda the n›ga
king—leaving his dwelling place and encircling the Blessed One’s body seven
times with his coils—stood with his great hood spread over the Blessed One,
(thinking,) “Don’t let the Blessed One be disturbed by cold. Don’t let the Blessed
One be disturbed by heat. Don’t let the Blessed One be disturbed by the touch of
flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, & creeping things.”
    Then, with the passing of seven days, the Blessed One emerged from that
concentration. Muccalinda the n›ga king, realizing that the sky had cleared and
was free of clouds, unraveled his coils from the body of the Blessed One,
dropped his own appearance and, assuming the appearance of a young man,
stood in front of the Blessed One with hands before his heart, paying homage.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Blissful is solitude
        for one who’s content,
                who has heard the Dhamma,
                who sees.
        Blissful is non-affliction
        with regard for the world,
                restraint for living beings.
        Blissful is dispassion
        with regard for the world,
                the overcoming of sensuality.
        But the subduing of the conceit “I am”1 —
                                                                                             38


                That is truly
                the ultimate bliss.


    N O T E : 1. See Ud 1:1, note 3.



    2:2 Kings (R›j› Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion a large
number of monks, after the meal, on returning from their alms round, were
sitting gathered together in the assembly hall when this discussion arose:
“Friends, which of these two kings has greater wealth, greater possessions, the
greater treasury, the larger realm, the greater stock of riding animals, the
greater army, greater power, greater might: King Seniya Bimbis›ra of Magadha
or King Pasenadi of Kosala?” And this discussion came to no conclusion.
     Then the Blessed One, emerging from his seclusion in the late afternoon,
went to the assembly hall and, on arrival, sat down on a seat laid out. Seated, he
addressed the monks: “For what topic are you sitting together here? And what
was the discussion that came to no conclusion?”
     “Just now, lord, after the meal, on returning from our alms round, we were
sitting gathered here at the assembly hall when this discussion arose: ‘Friends,
which of these two kings has greater wealth, greater possessions, the greater
treasury, the larger realm, the greater stock of riding animals, the greater army,
greater power, greater might: King Seniya Bimbis›ra of Magadha or King
Pasenadi of Kosala?’ This was the discussion that had come to no conclusion
when the Blessed One arrived.”
     “It isn’t proper, monks, that sons of good families, on having gone forth out
of faith from home to the homeless life, should talk on such a topic. When you
have gathered you have two duties: either Dhamma-talk or noble silence.”1
     Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Any sensual bliss in the world,
               any heavenly bliss,
        isn’t worth one sixteenth-sixteenth
        of the bliss of the ending of craving.


    N O T E : 1. SN 21:1 equates noble silence with the second jh›na. This apparently relates to
the fact that directed thought and evaluation, which MN 44 identifies as verbal fabrications, are
abandoned when going from the first jh›na into the second.
                                                                              39


   2:3 The Stick (Da˚˜a Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion, a large
number of boys on the road between S›vatthı & Jeta’s Grove were hitting a
snake with a stick. Then early in the morning the Blessed One adjusted his under
robe and—carrying his bowl & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. He saw the
large number of boys on the road between S›vatthı & Jeta’s Grove hitting the
snake with a stick.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      Whoever hits with a stick
      beings desiring ease,
      when he himself is looking for ease,
      will meet with no ease after death.
      Whoever doesn’t hit with a stick
      beings desiring ease,
      when he himself is looking for ease,
      will meet with ease after death.1


   N O T E : 1. These verses are identical with Dhp 131–132.




   2:4 Veneration (Sakk›ra Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the Blessed
One was worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given homage—a
recipient of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. The
community of monks was also worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and
given homage—a recipient of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites
for the sick. But the wanderers of other sects were not worshipped, revered,
honored, venerated, or given homage; nor were they recipients of robes, alms
food, lodgings, or medicinal requisites for the sick. So the wanderers of other
sects, unable to stand the veneration given to the Blessed One and the
community of monks, on seeing monks in village or wilderness, would insult,
revile, irritate, & harass them with discourteous, abusive language.
    Then a large number of monks went to the Blessed One and, on arrival,
having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said
to him, “At present the Blessed One is worshipped, revered, honored, venerated,
and given homage—a recipient of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal
requisites for the sick. The community of monks is also worshipped, revered,
                                                                                 40


honored, venerated, and given homage—a recipient of robes, alms food,
lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. But the wanderers of other sects are
not worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, or given homage; nor are they
recipients of robes, alms food, lodgings, or medicinal requisites for the sick. So
the wanderers of other sects, unable to stand the veneration given to the Blessed
One and the community of monks, on seeing monks in village or wilderness,
insult, revile, irritate, & harass them with discourteous, abusive language.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       When in contact with pleasure or pain
              in village or wilderness,
       don’t take it as yours or as others’.
       Contacts make contact
              dependent on a sense of acquisition.
       Where there’s no sense of acquisition,
              contacts would make contact
                      with what?

   See also: DN 21; MN 28




   2:5 The Lay Follower (Up›saka Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion a certain lay
follower from Icch›naºgalaka had arrived in S›vatthı on some business affairs.
Having settled his affairs in S›vatthı, he went to the Blessed One and, on arrival,
having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed
One said to him, “At long last you have managed to come here.”
    “For a long time, lord, have I wanted to come see the Blessed One, but being
involved in one business affair after another, I have not been able to do so.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       How blissful it is, for one who has nothing
             who has mastered the Dhamma,
             is learned.
       See him suffering, one who has something,
             a person bound in body
             with people.

   See also: Dhp 200, 221, 396, 421
                                                                              41



   2:6 The Pregnant Woman (Gabbhinin Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the young
wife of a certain wanderer was pregnant and on the verge of delivery. So she
said to the wanderer, “Go, brahman, get some oil for my delivery.”
    When this was said, the wanderer said to her, “But where can I get any oil?”
    A second time, she said to him, “Go, brahman, get some oil for my delivery.”
    A second time, he said to her, “But where can I get any oil?”
    A third time, she said to him, “Go, brahman get some oil for my delivery.”
    Now on that occasion at the storehouse of King Pasenadi Kosala
contemplatives & brahmans were being given as much oil or ghee as they
needed to drink, but not to take away. So the thought occurred to the wanderer,
“At present at the storehouse of King Pasenadi Kosala contemplatives &
brahmans are being given as much oil or ghee as they need to drink, but not to
take away. Suppose, having gone there, I were to drink as much oil as I need
and, on returning home, vomiting it up, were to give it to use at this delivery?”
    So, having gone to the storehouse of King Pasenadi Kosala, he drank as
much oil as he needed but, on returning home, was unable to bring it up or pass
it down. So he rolled back & forth, suffering from fierce pains, sharp & severe.
Then early in the morning the Blessed One adjusted his under robe and—
carrying his bowl & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. He saw the wanderer
rolling back & forth, suffering from fierce pains, sharp & severe.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      How blissful it is, for one who has nothing.
            Attainers-of-wisdom
            are people with nothing.
      See him suffering, one who has something,
            a person bound in mind
            with people.



   2:7 The Only Son (Ekaputta Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the dear and
beloved only son of a certain lay follower had died. So a large number of lay
followers—their clothes wet, their hair wet—went to the Blessed One in the
middle of the day and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As
they were sitting there the Blessed One said to them: “Why have you come
here—your clothes wet, your hair wet—in the middle of the day?”
                                                                                             42


   When this was said, the lay follower said to the Blessed One, “My dear and
beloved only son, lord, has died. This is why we have come here—our clothes
wet, our hair wet—in the middle of the day.”
   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Tied down by the allure
        of what seems dear,1
        heavenly beings, most people,
        worn out with misery,
        fall under the sway
        of the King of Death.
        But those who, day & night,
        heedfully abandon
        what seems dear,
        dig up misery
        by the root—
               Death’s bait
               so hard
               to overcome.


     N O T E : 1 . Following the reading, piyarÒpass›da-gaddhit›se in the Thai, Burmese, and BJT
editions. The Sri Lankan edition available from the Journal of Buddhist Ethics has, piyarÒpa-
s›tarÒpa-gaddhit› ye: “Those tied down by what seems dear & what seems agreeable”; the PTS
edition, piyarÒp›s›ta-gaddhit› ve: “Truly tied down by what seems dear & what is
disagreeable.” The parallel passage in the Ud›navarga (5.10) has, priyarÒpa-s›ta-grathit›: “Tied
down by what seems dear and is agreeable.”

    See also: MN 87, SN 42:11, Ud 2:8, Ud 8:8



    2:8 Suppav›s› (Suppav›s› Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Ku˚˜iya
in the Ku˚˜i˛˛h›na forest. And on that occasion Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter
had been seven years pregnant and seven days in difficult labor. She—touched
by fierce, sharp pains—endured them with three thoughts: “How rightly self-
awakened is the Blessed One who, abandoning this sort of suffering, teaches the
Dhamma! How well-practiced is the community of the Blessed One’s disciples
who practice, abandoning this sort of suffering! How truly blissful is unbinding,
where this sort of pain is not found!”
    Then Suppav›s› said to her husband, “Come, young master. Go to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, showing reverence with your head to his feet in my
name, ask whether he is free from illness & affliction, is carefree, strong, & living
in comfort, saying: ‘Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter, lord, shows reverence with
                                                                               43


her head to your feet and asks whether you are free from illness & affliction, are
carefree, strong, & living in comfort.’ And say this: ‘Suppav›s› has been seven
years pregnant and seven days in difficult labor. She—touched by fierce, sharp
pains—endures them with three thoughts: “How rightly self-awakened is the
Blessed One who, abandoning this sort of suffering, teaches the Dhamma! How
well-practiced is the community of the Blessed One’s disciples who practice,
abandoning this sort of suffering! How truly blissful is unbinding, where this sort
of pain is not found!”’”
    Responding, “Excellent!” to Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter, the Koliyan-
son went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed
One, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One,
“Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter, lord, shows reverence with her head to your
feet and asks whether you are free from illness & affliction, are carefree, strong,
& living in comfort. And she says this: ‘Suppav›s› has been seven years
pregnant and seven days in difficult labor. She—touched by fierce, sharp pains—
endures them with three thoughts: “How rightly self-awakened is the Blessed
One who, abandoning this sort of suffering, teaches the Dhamma! How well-
practiced is the community of the Blessed One’s disciples who practice,
abandoning this sort of suffering! How truly blissful is unbinding, where this sort
of pain is not found!”’”
    [The Blessed One said:] “May Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter be well & free
from disease. And may she deliver a son free from disease.” And at the same
time as the Blessed One’s statement, Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter—well &
free from disease—delivered a son free from disease.
    Saying, “Very well, lord,” the Koliyan-son, delighting in & approving of the
Blessed One’s words, got up from his seat, bowed down to the Blessed One
and—circling him to the right—returned to his home. He saw that Suppav›s› the
Koliyan-daughter—well & free from disease—had delivered a son free from
disease. On seeing this, the thought occurred to him, “How amazing! How
astounding!—the Tath›gata’s great power, great might, in that, at the same time
as the Blessed One’s statement, Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter—well & free
from disease—would deliver a son free from disease!” Gratified, he was joyful,
rapturous, & happy.
    Then Suppav›s› said to her husband, “Come, young master. Go to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, showing reverence with your head to his feet in my
name, saying: ‘Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter, lord, shows reverence with her
head to your feet.’ And say this: ‘Suppav›s›, who was seven years pregnant and
seven days in difficult labor, has now—well & free from disease—delivered a son
free from disease. She invites the community of monks, with the Buddha at its
head, for seven days of meals. May the Blessed One acquiesce to Suppav›s›’s
seven meals, together with the community of monks.’”
    Responding, “Excellent!” to Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter, the Koliyan-
son went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed
One, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One,
“Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter, lord, shows reverence with her head to your
feet. And she says this: ‘Suppav›s›, who was seven years pregnant and seven
                                                                                  44


days in difficult labor, has now—well & free from disease—delivered a son free
from disease. She invites the community of monks, with the Buddha at its head,
for seven days of meals. May the Blessed One acquiesce to Suppav›s›’s seven
meals, together with the community of monks.’”
    Now at that time a certain lay follower had invited the community of monks,
with the Buddha at its head, for the next day’s meal. That lay follower was a
supporter of Ven. Mah› Moggall›na. So the Blessed One addressed Ven. Mah›
Moggall›na, “Come, Moggall›na. Go to the lay follower and, on arrival, say to
him, ‘Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter, who was seven years pregnant and
seven days in difficult labor, has now—well & free from disease—delivered a son
free from disease. She has invited the community of monks, with the Buddha at
its head, for seven days of meals. Let Suppav›s› do seven meals. Afterward, you
will do yours.’ He’s your supporter.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. Moggall›na went to
the lay follower and, on arrival, said to him, “Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter,
who was seven years pregnant and seven days in difficult labor, has now—well
& free from disease—delivered a son free from disease. She has invited the
community of monks, with the Buddha at its head, for seven days of meals. Let
Suppav›s› do seven meals; afterward, you will do yours.”
    “Venerable sir, if Ven. Moggall›na will be my guarantor for three things—
(my) wealth, life, & faith—then let Suppav›s› do seven meals; afterward, I will
do mine.”
    “For two things, friend, will I be your guarantor: your wealth & life. Only
you are the guarantor of your faith.”
    “Venerable sir, if Ven. Moggall›na will be my guarantor for two things—
(my) wealth & life—then let Suppav›s› do seven meals; afterward, I will do
mine.”
    Then Ven. Moggall›na, having conciliated the lay follower, went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, said, “The lay follower, lord, has been conciliated.
Let Suppav›s› do seven meals; afterward, he will do his.”
    So for seven days Suppav›s› the Koliyan-daughter with her own hand
served & satisfied the community of monks, with the Buddha at its head, with
exquisite staple & non-staple food. And she had the child show reverence to the
Blessed One and the community of monks. Then Ven. S›riputta said to the child,
“I trust, child, that things are bearable for you. I trust that things are comfortable
for you. I trust that there’s no pain.”
    “From where, Ven. S›riputta, would things be bearable for me? From where
would they be comfortable for me living seven years in a belly of blood?”1
    Then Suppav›s›—(thinking,) “My son is conversing with the Dhamma
General!”—was gratified, joyful, rapturous, & happy.
    The Blessed One, knowing that Suppav›s› was gratified, joyful, rapturous, &
happy, said to her, “Suppav›s›, would you like to have another son like this?”
    “Lord Blessed One,2 I would like to have seven more sons like this!”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:
                                                                                        45


       The disagreeable
          in the guise of the agreeable,
       the unlovable
          in the guise of the lovable,
       pain in the guise of bliss,
          overcome
              one who is heedless.


   NO TES
     1 . Reading lohita-kucchiy› with the Thai edition. The Commentary favors the reading,
lohita-kumbhiy›, in a pot of blood. The Commentary states that Suppav›s›’s son later became
the famous arahant, Sıvalin, whom the Buddha declared to be foremost among his disciples in
receiving gifts.
     2. Reading bhante Bhagav› with the Thai edition. This extreme way of addressing the
Buddha also occurs in Ud 8:7. The Sri Lankan and Burmese editions here read simply Bhagav›.




   2:9 Vis›kh› (Vis›kh› Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Mig›ra’s mother.1 And on that occasion,
Vis›kh›, Mig›ra’s mother, had some dealings with King Pasenadi Kosala that he
did not settle as she had wished. So in the middle of the day she went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As she
was sitting there the Blessed One said to her, “Well now, Vis›kh›, where are you
coming from in the middle of the day?”
    “Just now, lord, I had some dealings with King Pasenadi Kosala that he did
not settle as I had wished.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       All subjection to others
              is painful.
       All independence
              is bliss.
       What is held in common
       brings suffering,
       for duties are hard
       to overcome.


   N O T E : 1 . According to the Commentary, Vis›kh› was actually Mig›ra’s daughter, but
because she introduced him to the Dhamma, she gained the epithet of being his mother.
                                                                                46




   2:10 Bhaddiya K›˘igodha (K›˘igodha Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Anupiy›
in the Mango Grove. And on that occasion, Ven. Bhaddiya, K›˘igodh›’s son, on
going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, would
repeatedly exclaim, “What bliss! What bliss!”
    A large number of monks heard Ven. Bhaddiya, K›˘igodh›’s son, on going to
the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, repeatedly exclaim,
“What bliss! What bliss!” and on hearing him, the thought occurred to them,
“There’s no doubt but that Ven. Bhaddiya, K›˘igodh›’s son, doesn’t enjoy
leading the holy life, for when he was a householder he knew the bliss of
kingship, so that now, on recollecting that when going to the wilderness, to the
root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, he is repeatedly exclaiming, ‘What bliss!
What bliss!’”
    So they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him,
sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they told him, “Ven. Bhaddiya,
K›˘igodh›’s son, lord, on going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an
empty dwelling, repeatedly exclaims, ‘What bliss! What bliss!’ There’s no doubt
but that Ven. Bhaddiya doesn’t enjoy leading the holy life, for when he was a
householder he knew the bliss of kingship, so that now, on recollecting that
when going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, he
is repeatedly exclaiming, ‘What bliss! What bliss!’”
    Then the Blessed One told a certain monk, “Come, monk. In my name, call
Bhaddiya, saying, ‘The Teacher calls you, friend Bhaddiya.’”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, the monk went to Ven.
Bhaddiya, K›˘igodh›’s son, and on arrival he said to him, “The Teacher calls you,
friend Bhaddiya.”
    Responding, “As you say, my friend,” to the monk, Ven. Bhaddiya,
K›˘igodh›’s son, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him, “Is it
true, Bhaddiya that—on going to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an
empty dwelling—you repeatedly exclaim, ‘What bliss! What bliss!’?”
    “Yes, lord.”
    “What compelling reason do you have in mind that—when going to the
wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling—you repeatedly
exclaim, ‘What bliss! What bliss!’?”
    “Before, when I has a householder, maintaining the bliss of kingship,1 lord, I
had guards posted within and without the royal apartments, within and without
the city, within and without the countryside. But even though I was thus
guarded, thus protected, I dwelled in fear—agitated, distrustful, & afraid. But
now, on going alone to the wilderness, to the root of a tree, or to an empty
dwelling, I dwell without fear, unagitated, confident, & unafraid—unconcerned,
unruffled, my wants satisfied, with my mind like a wild deer. This is the
                                                                                          47


compelling reason I have in mind that—when going to the wilderness, to the
root of a tree, or to an empty dwelling—I repeatedly exclaim, ‘What bliss! What
bliss!’”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       From whose heart
       there is no provocation,
       & for whom becoming & non-becoming
               are overcome,
       he— beyond fear,
               blissful,
               with no grief—
       is one the devas can’t see.


   N O T E : 1. Reading rajja-sukhaª with the Thai and PTS editions. The Sri Lankan and
Burmese editions have rajjaª: “kingship.”

   See also: SN 1:10; AN 3:35; AN 11:10; Thag 1:14; Thag 1:41; Thag 1:49; Thag 18




       3 : Nanda


   3:1 Kamma (Kamma Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion a certain
monk was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body held
erect, enduring fierce pains, sharp & severe, that were the result of old kamma—
mindful, alert, without suffering. The Blessed One saw him sitting not far away,
his legs crossed, his body held erect, enduring fierce pains, sharp & severe, that
were the result of old kamma—mindful, alert, and not struck down by them.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       For the monk who has left
              all kamma
                     behind,
       shaking off the dust of the past,
              steady, unpossessive,
                     Such:1
       There’s no point in telling
                     anyone else.
                                                                                               48




    N O T E : 1 . Such (t›din): An adjective applied to the mind of one who has attained the
goal. It indicates that the mind “is what it is”—indescribable but not subject to change or
alteration.

    See also: SN 41:3; AN 8:30; Thag 6:10



    3:2 Nanda (Nanda Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. Nanda—
the Blessed One’s brother, son of his maternal aunt—announced to a large
number of monks: “I don’t enjoy leading the holy life, my friends. I can’t keep
up the holy life. Giving up the training, I will return to the common life.”
    Then a certain monk went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed
down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he told the Blessed One:
“Lord, Ven. Nanda—the Blessed One’s brother, son of his maternal aunt—has
announced to a large number of monks: ‘I don’t enjoy leading the holy life, my
friends. I can’t keep up the holy life. Giving up the training, I will return to the
common life.’”
    Then the Blessed One told a certain monk, “Come, monk. In my name, call
Nanda, saying, ‘The Teacher calls you, friend Nanda.’”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, the monk went to Ven.
Nanda, on arrival he said, “The Teacher calls you, friend Nanda.”
    Responding, “As you say, my friend,” to the monk, Ven. Nanda went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he
was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him, “Is it true, Nanda, that you have
announced to a large number of monks: ‘I don’t enjoy leading the holy life, my
friends. I can’t keep up the holy life. Giving up the training, I will return to the
common life’?”
    “Yes, lord.”
    “But why, Nanda, don’t you enjoy leading the holy life? Why can’t you keep
up the holy life? Why, giving up the training, will you return to the common
life?”
    “Lord, as I was leaving home, a Sakyan girl—the envy of the countryside—
glanced up at me, with her hair half-combed, and said, ‘Hurry back, master.’
Recollecting that, I don’t enjoy leading the holy life. I can’t keep up the holy life.
Giving up the training, I will return to the common life.”
    Then, taking Ven. Nanda by the arm—as a strong man might flex his
extended arm or extend his flexed arm—the Blessed One disappeared from Jeta’s
Grove and reappeared among the devas of the heaven of the Thirty-three
[T›vatiªsa]. Now on that occasion about 500 dove-footed nymphs had come to
                                                                             49


wait upon Sakka, the ruler of the devas. The Blessed One said to Ven. Nanda,
“Nanda, do you see these 500 dove-footed nymphs?”
     “Yes, lord.”
     “What do you think, Nanda? Which is lovelier, better looking, more
charming: the Sakyan girl, the envy of the countryside, or these 500 dove-footed
nymphs?”
     “Lord, compared to these 500 dove-footed nymphs, the Sakyan girl, the envy
of the countryside, is like a cauterized monkey with its ears & nose cut off. She
doesn’t count. She’s not even a small fraction. There’s no comparison. The 500
dove-footed nymphs are lovelier, better looking, more charming.”
     “Then take joy, Nanda. Take joy! I am your guarantor for getting 500 dove-
footed nymphs.”
     “If the Blessed One is my guarantor for getting 500 dove-footed nymphs, I
will enjoy leading the holy life under the Blessed One.”
     Then, taking Ven. Nanda by the arm—as a strong man might flex his
extended arm or extend his flexed arm—the Blessed One disappeared from
among the devas of the heaven of the Thirty-three and reappeared at Jeta’s
Grove. The monks heard, “They say that Ven. Nanda—the Blessed One’s
brother, son of his maternal aunt—is leading the holy life for the sake of
nymphs. They say that the Blessed One is his guarantor for getting 500 dove-
footed nymphs.”
     Then the monks who were companions of Ven. Nanda went around
addressing him as they would a hired hand & a person who had been bought:
“Venerable Nanda, they say, has been hired. Venerable Nanda, they say, has
been bought.1 He’s leading the holy life for the sake of nymphs. The Blessed One
is his guarantor for getting 500 dove-footed nymphs.”
     Then Ven. Nanda—humiliated, ashamed, & disgusted that the monks who
were his companions were addressing him as they would a hired hand & a
person who had been bought—went to dwell alone, secluded, heedful, ardent, &
resolute. He in no long time entered & remained in the supreme goal of the holy
life for which clansmen rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing
& realizing it for himself right in the here-&-now. He knew, “Birth is ended, the
holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for the sake of this
world.” And thus Ven. Nanda became another one of the arahants.
     Then a certain devat›, in the far extreme of the night, her extreme radiance
lighting up the entirety of Jeta’s Grove, approached the Blessed One. On arrival,
having bowed down to him, she stood to one side. As she was standing there,
she said to the Blessed One, “Lord, Ven. Nanda—the Blessed One’s brother, son
of his maternal aunt—through the ending of the effluents, has entered & remains
in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, directly knowing &
realizing them for himself right in the here-&-now.” And within the Blessed One,
the knowledge arose: “Nanda, through the ending of the effluents, has entered
& remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, directly
knowing & realizing them for himself right in the here-&-now.”
     Then, when the night had passed, Ven. Nanda went to the Blessed One and,
on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there,
                                                                                             50


he said to the Blessed One, “Lord, about the Blessed One’s being my guarantor
for getting 500 dove-footed nymphs: I hereby release the Blessed One from that
promise.”
    “Nanda, having comprehended your awareness with my own awareness, I
realized that ‘Nanda, through the ending of the effluents, has entered & remains
in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, directly knowing &
realizing them for himself right in the here-&-now.’ And a devat› informed me
that ‘Ven. Nanda, through the ending of the effluents, has entered & remains in
the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, directly knowing &
realizing them for himself right in the here-&-now.’ When your mind, through
lack of clinging, was released from the effluents, I was thereby released from
that promise.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        In whom       the mire of sensuality is crossed over,2
                      the thorn of sensuality crushed,
                      the ending of delusion reached:
                He doesn’t quiver
                from pleasures & pains
                      : a monk.


    NO TES
     1. The monks here address Ven. Nanda as “›yasmant.” According to DN 16, they did not
normally address one another in this formal way while the Buddha was still alive. Thus there
is an element of sarcasm in the way they use the term here.
     2. Reading yassa ti˚˚o k›mapaºko with the Thai edition. The Burmese, Sri Lankan, and PTS
editions read, yassa nitti˚˚o paºko: “In whom the mire is crossed over.” The parallel passage in
the Ud›navarga (32.2) essentially agrees with this latter version.



    3:3 Yasoja (Yasoja Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion approximately
500 monks, headed by Ven. Yasoja, had arrived in S›vatthı to see the Blessed
One. As these visiting monks were exchanging greetings with the resident
monks, setting their lodgings in order, and putting away their robes & bowls,
they made a loud racket, a great racket. Then the Blessed One said to Ven.
finanda, “finanda, what is that loud racket, that great racket like fishermen with
a catch of fish?”
    “Lord, those are approximately 500 monks, headed by Ven. Yasoja, who
have arrived in S›vatthı to see the Blessed One. As these visiting monks are
exchanging greetings with the resident monks, setting their lodgings in order,
                                                                             51


and putting away their robes & bowls, they are making a loud racket, a great
racket.”
    “In that case, finanda, tell those monks in my name, ‘The Teacher calls you,
friends.’”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. finanda went to the
monks and said, “The Teacher calls you, friends.”
    Responding, “As you say, friend,” to Ven. finanda, the monks went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they
were sitting there, the Blessed One said to them, “Monks, why were you making
that loud racket, that great racket, like fishermen with a catch of fish?”
    When this was said, Ven. Yasoja said to the Blessed One, “Lord, these 500
monks have arrived in S›vatthı to see the Blessed One. As they were exchanging
greetings with the resident monks, setting their lodgings in order, and putting
away their robes & bowls, they made a loud racket, a great racket.”
    “Go away, monks. I dismiss you. You are not to stay in my vicinity.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, the monks got up from
their seats, bowed down to the Blessed One, and left, circling him to the right.
Setting their lodgings in order and taking their robes & bowls, they went
wandering among the Vajjians. After wandering by stages among the Vajjians,
they came to the River Vaggamud›. There on the bank of the River Vaggamud›
they made leaf-huts and entered the Rains Retreat.
    Then Ven. Yasoja addressed the monks as they entered the Rains Retreat:
“Friends, the Blessed One dismissed us, wishing for our benefit, seeking our
wellbeing, being sympathetic, and acting out of sympathy. Let’s live in such a
way that the Blessed One will be gratified by our way of living.”
    “As you say, friend,” the monks responded to Ven. Yasoja. And so, living
secluded, ardent, & resolute, every one of them realized the Three Knowledges
[remembrance of past lives, knowledge of the arising & passing away of living
beings, and knowledge of the ending of mental effluents] in the course of that
very Rains Retreat.
    Then the Blessed One, having stayed as long as he liked in S›vatthı, went
wandering in the direction of Ves›lı. After wandering by stages, he arrived in
Ves›lı and stayed there in the Peaked Roof Pavilion in the Great Wood. Then,
encompassing with his awareness the awareness of the monks staying on the
bank of the River Vaggamud›, he said to Ven. finanda, “This direction seems
bright to me, finanda. This direction seems dazzling to me. It’s not at all
repugnant for me to go & pay attention to where the monks on the bank of the
River Vaggamud› are staying. Send a messenger into their presence to say, ‘The
Teacher calls you, friends. The Teacher wants to see you.’”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. finanda went to a
certain monk and said, “Come now, friend. Go to the monks on the bank of the
River Vaggamud› and say to them, ‘The Teacher calls you, friends. The Teacher
wants to see you.’”
    Responding, “As you say, friend,” to Ven. finanda, the monk—just as a
strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm—disappeared
from the Peaked Roof Pavilion in the Great Wood and appeared in front of the
                                                                               52


monks on the bank of the River Vaggamud›. Then he said to them, “The
Teacher calls you, friends. The Teacher wants to see you.”
    Responding, “As you say, friend,” to the monk, the monks set their lodgings
in order and, taking their robes & bowls, disappeared from the bank of the River
Vaggamud›—just as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his
extended arm—and appeared in the presence of the Blessed One in the Peaked
Roof Pavilion in the Great Wood.
    Now, at that time the Blessed One was sitting in imperturbable concentration
[either in the fourth jh›na, the dimension of the infinitude of space, or the
dimension of the infinitude of consciousness]. The thought occurred to the
monks, “Now, in which mental dwelling is the Blessed One now residing?” Then
they realized, “He is residing in the imperturbable dwelling.” So they all sat in
imperturbable concentration.
    Then Ven. finanda—when the night was far advanced, at the end of the first
watch—got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, stood facing
the Blessed One, paying homage with his hands placed palm-to-palm over his
heart, and said to him, “The night, lord, is far advanced. The first watch has
ended. The visiting monks have been sitting here a long time. May the Blessed
One greet them.” When this was said, the Blessed One remained silent.
     Then a second time, when the night was far advanced, at the end of the
middle watch, Ven. finanda got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one
shoulder, stood facing the Blessed One, paying homage to him with his hands
placed palm-to-palm over his heart, and said to him, “The night, lord, is far
advanced. The middle watch has ended. The visiting monks have been sitting
here a long time. May the Blessed One greet them.” When this was said, the
Blessed One remained silent.
     Then a third time, when the night was far advanced, at the end of the last
watch, as dawn was approaching and the face of the night was beaming, Ven.
finanda got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, stood facing
the Blessed One, paying homage to him with his hands placed palm-to-palm
over his heart, and said to him, “The night, lord, is far advanced. The last watch
has ended. Dawn is approaching and the face of the night is beaming. The
visiting monks have been sitting here a long time. May the Blessed One greet
them.”
     Then the Blessed One, emerging from his imperturbable concentration, said
to Ven. finanda, “finanda, if you had known, not even that much would have
occurred to you (to say).1 I, along with all 500 of these monks, have been sitting
in imperturbable concentration.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      In whom they’re defeated—
            the thorn of sensuality,
            insult,
            assault,
            & imprisonment:
                                                                                             53


        Like a mountain standing unperturbed,
               he doesn’t quiver
               from pleasures & pains
                     : a monk.


    N O T E : 1 . All the major editions here read, nappa˛ibh›seyya: “He/it would have not said
in return.” This makes no sense, so I follow a variant reading listed in the Burmese edition,
nappa˛ibheyya (the optative of pa˛ibh›ti).



    3:4 S›riputta (S›riputta Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. S›riputta
was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body held erect,
having set mindfulness to the fore. The Blessed One saw Ven. S›riputta sitting
not far away, his legs crossed, his body held erect, having set mindfulness to the
fore.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        As a mountain of rock
        is unwavering, well-settled,
        so a monk whose delusion is ended
        doesn’t quiver—
        just like a mountain.1


    N O T E : 1 . This verse also appears among the verses attributed to Ven. Revata at Thag
14:1 (verse 651 in the PTS edition) and among the verses attributed to Ven. S›riputta at Thag
17:2 (verse 1000 in the PTS edition).




    3:5 Mah› Moggall›na (Kolita Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. Mah›
Moggall›na was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body
held erect, having mindfulness immersed in the body well-established within.
The Blessed One saw Ven. Mah› Moggall›na sitting not far away, his legs
crossed, his body held erect, having mindfulness immersed in the body well-
established within.
                                                                                   54


   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       With mindfulness immersed in the body
              well-established, restrained
       with regard to the six contact-media—
              continually centered,
              a monk
              can know
       unbinding for himself.

   See also: MN 119; SN 47:20




   3:6 Pilinda (Pilinda Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near R›jagaha
at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ refuge. Now at on that occasion Ven.
Pilindavaccha went around addressing the monks as if they were outcastes.
    So a large number of monks went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, bowed
down to him and sat to one side. As they were sitting there they said to him,
“Lord, Ven. Pilindavaccha goes around addressing the monks as if they were
outcastes.”
    Then the Blessed One told a certain monk, “Come, monk. In my name, call
Pilindavaccha, saying, ‘The Teacher calls you, friend Vaccha.’”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, the monk went to Ven.
Pilindavaccha and on arrival said to him, “The Teacher calls you, friend Vaccha.”
    Responding, “As you say, my friend,” to the monk, Ven. Pilindavaccha went
to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him, “Is it true, Pilindavaccha,
that you go around addressing the monks as if they were outcastes?”
    “Yes, lord.”
    Then the Blessed One, having directed attention to Ven. Pilindavaccha’s
previous lives, said to the monks, “Don’t take offense at the monk Vaccha. It’s
not out of inner hatred that he goes around addressing the monks as if they
were outcastes. For 500 consecutive lifetimes the monk Vaccha has been born in
brahman families. For a long time he has been accustomed to addressing people
as outcastes. That’s why he goes around addressing the monks as if they were
outcastes.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       In whom there’s no deceit
       or conceit,
       his greed ended,
                                                                                                     55


        unpossessive, free from longing,
        his anger dispelled,
        his mind unbound:1
            He’s      a contemplative.
            He is     a brahman
               : a monk.


     N O T E : 1. The first part of this verse is nearly identical with the first part of a verse in Sn
3:4 (verse 469 in the PTS edition).

    See also: SN 21:4



    3:7 Mah› Kassapa (Kassapa Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near R›jagaha
at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. And on that occasion Ven. Mah›
Kassapa was staying at the Pipphali Cave, sitting for seven days in a single
session, having attained a certain level of concentration. Then, with the passing
of seven days, he emerged from that concentration. To him, emerging from that
concentration, the thought occurred: “What if I were to go into R›jagaha for
alms?”
    Now on that occasion 500 devat›s were in a state of eagerness for the chance
to give alms to Ven. Mah› Kassapa. But Ven. Mah› Kassapa, turning down those
500 devat›s, early in the morning adjusted his under robe and—carrying his
bowl & robes—went into R›jagaha for alms.
    Now on that occasion Sakka, the deva-king, wanted to give alms to Ven.
Mah› Kassapa. So, assuming the appearance of a weaver, he was working a
loom, while Suj›t›, an asura-maiden, filled the shuttle. Then, as Ven. Mah›
Kassapa was going on an almsround that bypassed no donors1 in R›jagaha, he
arrived at Sakka’s home. Sakka saw him coming from afar and, on seeing him,
came out of house to meet him. Taking the bowl from his hand, entered the
house, took cooked rice from the pot, filled the bowl, and gave it back to Ven.
Mah› Kassapa. And that gift of alms included many kinds of curry, many kinds
of sauces.
    The thought occurred to Ven. Mah› Kassapa, “Now, who is this being with
such power & might as this?” Then the thought occurred to him, “This is Sakka,
the deva-king, isn’t it?” On realizing this, he said to Sakka, “Is this your doing,
Kosiya?2 Don’t ever do anything like this again.”
    “We, too, need merit, Ven. Kassapa. We, too, have use for merit.”
    Then, bowing down to Ven. Mah› Kassapa and circling him to the right,
Sakka rose up into the air and, while up in the sky, exclaimed three times:
    “O the alms, the foremost alms, well-established in Kassapa!”
    “O the alms, the foremost alms, well-established in Kassapa!”
    “O the alms, the foremost alms, well-established in Kassapa!”
                                                                                               56


   The Blessed One—with his divine hearing-property, surpassing that of the
human—heard Sakka the deva-king, while up in the sky, exclaiming three times:
   “O the alms, the foremost alms, well-established in Kassapa!”
   “O the alms, the foremost alms, well-established in Kassapa!”
   “O the alms, the foremost alms, well-established in Kassapa!”
   On realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       The monk going for alms,
       supporting himself and no other:
       The devas adore one who is Such,
             calmed & ever mindful.


   NO TES
    1. Going on an almsround that bypasses no donors is one of the thirteen optional ascetic
(dhutaºga) practices. See Thag 16:7.
    2. Kosiya—“Owl”—is Sakka’s clan name.



   3:8 Alms (Pi˚˜a Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion a large
number of monks, after the meal, on returning from their alms round, were
sitting gathered together at the kareri-tree pavilion when this discussion arose:
“Friends, an alms-collecting monk,1 while going for alms, periodically sees
agreeable sights via the eye. He periodically hears agreeable sounds via the
ear… smells agreeable aromas via the nose… tastes agreeable flavors via the
tongue… touches agreeable tactile sensations via the body. An alms-collecting
monk, while going for alms, is honored, respected, revered, venerated, and
given homage.
     “So, friends, let’s become alms-collecting monks. Then we, too, while going
for alms, will periodically get to see agreeable sights via the eye… to hear
agreeable sounds via the ear… to smell agreeable aromas via the nose… to taste
agreeable flavors via the tongue… to touch agreeable tactile sensations via the
body. We, too, while going for alms, will be honored, respected, revered,
venerated, and given homage.” And this discussion came to no conclusion.
     Then the Blessed One, emerging from his seclusion in the late afternoon,
went to the kareri-tree pavilion and, on arrival, sat down on a seat laid out.
Seated, he addressed the monks: “For what topic are you sitting together here?
And what was the discussion that came to no conclusion?”
     “Just now, lord, after the meal, on returning from our alms round, we were
sitting gathered together here at the kareri-tree pavilion when this discussion
arose: [They repeat what had been said.]”
                                                                                              57


    “It isn’t proper, monks, that sons of good families, on having gone forth out
of faith from home to the homeless life, should talk on such a topic. When you
have gathered you have two duties: either Dhamma-talk or noble silence.”2
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        The monk going for alms,
        supporting himself and no other:
        The devas adore one who is Such
              if he’s not intent
              on fame & praise.


    NO TES
    1. A monk who makes a steady practice of eating only the food received while going for
alms.
    2. SN 21:1 equates noble silence with the second jh›na. This apparently relates to the fact
that directed thought and evaluation, which MN 44 identifies as verbal fabrications, are
abandoned when going from the first jh›na into the second.



    3:9 Crafts (Sippa Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. Now at that time a large number of
monks, after the meal, on returning from their alms round, were sitting
gathered together at a pavilion when this discussion arose: “Who, friends, knows
a craft? Who’s studying which craft? Which is the supreme among crafts?”
     With regard to that, some said, “The elephant-craft is the supreme craft
among crafts.” Some said, “The horse-craft is the supreme craft among crafts” …
“The chariot-craft…” … “Archery…” … “Swordsmanship…” … “Signaling1 …”
… “Calculating…” … “Accounting…” … “Writing…” … “Literary
composition…” … “Cosmology…” Some said, “Geomancy is the supreme craft
among crafts.” And this discussion came to no conclusion.
     Then the Blessed One, emerging from his seclusion in the late afternoon,
went to the pavilion and, on arrival, sat down on a seat laid out. As he was sitting
there, he addressed the monks: “For what topic are you sitting together here?
And what was the discussion that came to no conclusion?”
     “Just now, lord, after the meal, on returning from our alms round, we were
sitting gathered together here at the pavilion when this discussion arose: [They
repeat what had been said.]”
     “It isn’t proper, monks, that sons of good families, on having gone forth out
of faith from home to the homeless life, should talk on such a topic. When you
have gathered you have two duties: either Dhamma-talk or noble silence.”
                                                                                         58


   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Supporting himself
       without a craft—
       light, desiring the goal—
       his faculties controlled,
       released               everywhere;
       living in no home,
       unpossessive,
       free from longing,
       having slain M›ra,
       going alone
           : a monk.


      N O T E : 1. Reading mudda-sippam with the Commentary. The Thai edition has muddha-
sippam, which could mean phrenology, but that doesn’t fit in with the previous members of the
list, all of which deal with military skills.

   See also: SN 46:45




   3:10 Surveying the World (Loka Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion, the Blessed One was staying at Uruvel› on
the bank of the Nerañjar› River at the root of the Bodhi tree—the tree of
awakening—newly awakened. And on that occasion he sat at the root of the
Bodhi tree for seven days in one session, sensitive to the bliss of release. Then,
with the passing of seven days, after emerging from that concentration, he
surveyed the world with the eye of an Awakened One. As he did so, he saw
living beings burning with the many fevers and aflame with the many fires born
of passion, aversion, & delusion.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, he on that occasion exclaimed:

       This world is burning.
       Afflicted by contact,
       it calls disease a ‘self.’
       By whatever means it construes [anything],
       it becomes otherwise than that.1
       Becoming otherwise,
       the world is
                attached to becoming
                afflicted by becoming
       and yet delights
                                                                                            59


               in that very becoming.
        Where there’s delight,
               there is fear.
        What one fears
               is stressful.
        This holy life is lived
        for the abandoning of becoming.
Whatever contemplatives or brahmans say that liberation from becoming is by
means of becoming, all of them are not released from becoming, I say.
And whatever contemplatives or brahmans say that escape from becoming is by
means of non-becoming, all of them have not escaped from becoming, I say.
        For this stress comes into play
        in dependence on every acquisition.2
        With the ending of every clinging/sustenance,
        there’s no stress coming into play.
               Look at this world:
        Beings, afflicted with thick ignorance,
        are unreleased
        from passion for what has come to be.
        All levels of becoming,
               anywhere,
               in any way,
        are inconstant, stressful, subject to change.
        Seeing this—as it’s come to be—
        with right discernment,
        one abandons craving for becoming,
        and doesn’t delight in non-becoming.3
        From the total ending of craving
        comes fading & cessation without remainder:
               unbinding.
        For the monk unbound
        through lack of clinging/sustenance,
        there’s no further becoming.
        He has conquered M›ra,
               won the battle,
        having gone beyond becomings
                       : Such.


    NO TES
    1. In other words, regardless of whatever one bases one’s construal of an experience on, by
the time the construal is complete, the base has already changed.
    2. Reading sabb’upadhiª hi with the Thai edition. The Burmese and Sri Lankan editions
read upadhiª hi: “For this stress comes into play in dependence on acquisition.” The parallel
passage in the Ud›navarga (32.36) agrees with this latter version.
                                                                                             60


    3. This passage indicates the way out of the dilemma posed above, that one cannot gain
release either through becoming or non-becoming. Rather than focus on whether one wants to
take “what has come to be” in the direction of becoming or non-becoming, one develops
dispassion for “what has come to be” as it occurs, and this provides the way out. On this point,
see The Paradox of Becoming, chapters 2 and 6.

    See also: MN 113; SN 1:1; SN 12:15; Iti 49




        4 : Meghiya


    4:1 Meghiya (Meghiya Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying among the
C›likans, at C›lik› Mountain. And on that occasion Ven. Meghiya was his
attendant. Then Ven. Meghiya went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having
bowed down to him, stood to one side. As he was standing there he said to the
Blessed One, “I would like to go into Jantu Village for alms.”
     “Then do, Meghiya, what you think it is now time to do.”
     Then in the early morning, Ven. Meghiya adjusted his under robe and—
carrying his bowl & robes—went into Jantu Village for alms. Having gone for
alms in Jantu Village, after the meal, returning from his alms round, he went to
the bank of the Kimik›l› River. As he was walking up & down along the bank of
the river to exercise his legs, he saw a pleasing, charming mango grove. Seeing
it, the thought occurred to him: “How pleasing & charming this mango grove!
It’s enough for a young man of good family intent on exertion to exert himself
[in meditation]. If the Blessed One gives me permission, I would like to exert
myself [in meditation] in this mango grove.”
     So Ven. Meghiya went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed
down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One,
“Just now, in the early morning, I adjusted my under robe and—carrying my
bowl & robes—went into Jantu Village for alms. Having gone for alms in Jantu
Village, after the meal, returning from my alms round, I went to the bank of the
Kimik›l› River. As I was walking up & down along the bank of the river to
exercise my legs, I saw a pleasing, charming mango grove. Seeing it, the thought
occurred to me: ‘How pleasing & charming this mango grove! It’s enough for a
young man of good family intent on exertion to exert himself [in meditation]. If
the Blessed One gives me permission, I would like to exert myself [in meditation]
in this mango grove.’ If the Blessed One gives me permission, I would like to go
to the mango grove to exert myself [in meditation].”
     When this was said, the Blessed One responded to Ven. Meghiya, “As long as
I am still alone, stay here until another monk comes.”
     A second time, Ven. Meghiya said to the Blessed One, “Lord, the Blessed One
has nothing further to do, and nothing further to add to what he has done. I,
                                                                                   61


however, have something further to do, and something further to add to what I
have done. If the Blessed One gives me permission, I would like to go to the
mango grove to exert myself [in meditation].”
     A second time, the Blessed One responded to Ven. Meghiya, “As long as I am
still alone, stay here until another monk comes.”
     A third time, Ven. Meghiya said to the Blessed One, “Lord, the Blessed One
has nothing further to do, and nothing further to add to what he has done. I,
however, have something further to do, and something further to add to what I
have done. If the Blessed One gives me permission, I would like to go to the
mango grove to exert myself [in meditation].”
     “As you are talking about exertion, Meghiya, what can we say? Do what you
think it is now time to do.”
     Then Ven. Meghiya, rising from his seat, bowing down to the Blessed One
and, circling him to the right, went to the mango grove. On arrival, having gone
deep into the grove, he sat down at the root of a certain tree for the day’s
abiding.
     Now while Ven. Meghiya was staying in the mango grove, he was for the
most part assailed by three kinds of unskillful thoughts: thoughts of sensuality,
thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of doing harm. The thought occurred to him:
“How amazing! How astounding! Even though it was through faith that I went
forth from home to the homeless life, still I am overpowered by these three
kinds of unskillful thoughts: thoughts of sensuality, thoughts of ill will, and
thoughts of doing harm.”
     Emerging from his seclusion in the late afternoon, he went to the Blessed One
and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting
there he said to the Blessed One, “Just now, while I was staying in the mango
grove, I was for the most part assailed by three kinds of unskillful thoughts:
thoughts of sensuality, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of doing harm. The
thought occurred to me: ‘How amazing! How astounding! Even though it was
through faith that I went forth from home to the homeless life, still I am
overpowered by these three kinds of unskillful thoughts: thoughts of sensuality,
thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of doing harm.’”
     “Meghiya, in one whose awareness-release is still immature, five qualities
bring it to maturity. Which five?
     “There is the case where a monk has admirable people as friends,
companions, & colleagues. In one whose awareness-release is still immature, this
is the first quality that brings it to maturity.
     “Furthermore, the monk is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with
the P›˛imokkha, consummate in his behavior & range of activity. He trains
himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest
faults. In one whose awareness-release is still immature, this is the second quality
that brings it to maturity.
     “Furthermore, he gets to hear at will, easily and without difficulty, talk that is
truly sobering and conducive to the opening of awareness, i.e., talk on modesty,
contentment, seclusion, non-entanglement, arousing persistence, virtue,
concentration, discernment, release, and the knowledge & vision of release. In
                                                                                  62


one whose awareness-release is still immature, this is the third quality that brings
it to maturity.
     “Furthermore, he keeps his persistence aroused for abandoning unskillful
[mental] qualities and for taking on skillful qualities. He is steadfast, solid in his
effort, not shirking his duties with regard to skillful qualities. In one whose
awareness-release is still immature, this is the fourth quality that brings it to
maturity.
     “Furthermore, he is discerning, endowed with the discernment related to
arising & passing away—noble, penetrating, leading to the right ending of stress.
In one whose awareness-release is still immature, this is the fifth quality that
brings it to maturity.
     “Meghiya, in one whose awareness-release is still immature, these are the
five qualities that bring it to maturity.
     “Meghiya, when a monk has admirable people as friends, companions, &
colleagues, it is to be expected that he will be virtuous, will dwell restrained in
accordance with the P›˛imokkha, consummate in his behavior & range of
activity, and will train himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing
danger in the slightest faults.
     “When a monk has admirable people as friends & colleagues, it is to be
expected that he will get to hear at will, easily and without difficulty, talk that is
truly sobering and conducive to the opening of awareness, i.e., talk on modesty,
contentment, seclusion, non-entanglement, arousing persistence, virtue,
concentration, discernment, release, and the knowledge & vision of release.
     “When a monk has admirable people as friends, companions, & colleagues, it
is to be expected that he will keep his persistence aroused for abandoning
unskillful qualities and for taking on skillful qualities—steadfast, solid in his
effort, not shirking his duties with regard to skillful qualities.
     “When a monk has admirable people as friends, companions, & colleagues, it
is to be expected that he will be discerning, endowed with the discernment
relating to arising & passing away—noble, penetrating, leading to the right
ending of stress.
     “And furthermore, when the monk is established in these five qualities, there
are four additional qualities he should develop: He should develop
[contemplation of] the unattractive so as to abandon passion. He should develop
good will so as to abandon ill will. He should develop mindfulness of in-&-out
breathing so as to cut off thinking. He should develop the perception of
inconstancy so as to uproot the conceit, ‘I am.’1 For a monk perceiving
inconstancy, the perception of not-self is made steady. One perceiving not-self
attains the uprooting of the conceit, ‘I am’—unbinding right in the here-&-now.”
     Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Little thoughts, subtle thoughts,
               when followed, stir up the heart.
       Not comprehending the thoughts of the heart,
               one runs here & there,
                                                                                   63


             the mind out of control.
       But comprehending the thoughts of the heart,
             one who is ardent, mindful,
             restrains them.
       When, followed, they stir up the heart,
             one awakened
             lets them go without trace.


   N O T E : 1. See Ud 1:1, note 3.

   See also: SN 45:2; AN 8:2; AN 9:1



   4:2 High-strung (Uddhata Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying in Upavattana,
the Mallan sal grove near Kusinar›.1 And on that occasion, not far from the
Blessed One, many monks were staying in wilderness huts: high-strung, rowdy,
flighty, talkative, of loose words & muddled mindfulness, unalert,
unconcentrated, their minds scattered, their faculties left wide open.
    The Blessed One saw those many monks staying in wilderness huts: high-
strung, rowdy, flighty, talkative, of loose words & muddled mindfulness,
unalert, unconcentrated, their minds scattered, their faculties left wide open.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       By leaving your body unprotected,
       being immersed in wrong view,
          conquered by sloth & torpor,
       you go under M›ra’s sway.
          Therefore,
       with protected mind,
       ranging in right resolve,
       honoring right view,
       knowing rise-&-fall,
       conquering sloth & torpor, a monk
          leaves all
          bad destinations
          behind.


   N O T E : 1. This is the location where the Buddha later was totally unbound.

   See also: MN 69
                                                                                64




   4:3 The Cowherd (Gop›la Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was wandering among the
Kosalans with a large community of monks. Then, coming down from the road,
he went to a certain tree, and on arrival sat down on a seat laid out. A certain
cowherd then went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One, instructed, urged,
roused, & encouraged him with Dhamma-talk. The cowherd—instructed, urged,
roused, & encouraged by the Blessed One’s talk on Dhamma—said to him,
“Lord, may the Blessed One, together with the community of monks, acquiesce
to my offer of tomorrow’s meal.”
    The Blessed One acquiesced with silence.
    Then the cowherd, understanding the Blessed One’s acquiescence, got up
from his seat, bowed down to the Blessed One and left, circling him to the right.
    Then, after the night had passed, the cowherd—having prepared in his own
home a great deal of thick milk-rice porridge & fresh ghee—announced the time
of the meal to the Blessed One: “It’s time, lord. The meal is ready.”
    So the Blessed One early in the morning adjusted his under robe and—
carrying his bowl & robes—went together with the community of monks to the
cowherd’s home. On arrival, he sat down on a seat laid out. The cowherd, with
his own hand, served & satisfied the community of monks headed by the Blessed
One with thick milk-rice porridge & fresh ghee. Then, when the Blessed One had
eaten and had removed his hand from his bowl, the cowherd, taking a lower
seat, sat down to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One, instructed,
urged, roused, & encouraged him with Dhamma-talk, then got up from his seat
& left.
    Now, not long after the Blessed One’s departure, the cowherd was killed by a
certain man between the boundaries of two villages. A large number of monks
then went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to
one side. As they were sitting there, they told him, “The cowherd who today
served & satisfied the community of monks headed by the Blessed One with
thick milk-rice porridge & fresh ghee, has been killed, it is said, by a certain man
between the boundaries of two villages.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      Whatever an enemy
      might do to an enemy,
              or a foe
              to a foe,
      the ill-directed mind
      can do to you
              even worse.1
                                                                                     65



   N O T E : 1 . This verse also occurs at Dhp 42, where it is paired with Dhp 43:
       Whatever a mother, father
       or other kinsman
       might do for you,
       the well-directed mind
       can do for you
               even better.

   See also: MN 136



   4:4 Moonlit (Juñha Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near R›jagaha
at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. And on that occasion Ven.
S›riputta and Ven. Mah› Moggall›na were staying in Pigeon Cave. Then, on a
moonlit night, Ven. S›riputta—his head newly shaven—was sitting in the open
air, having attained a certain level of concentration.
    And on that occasion two yakkhas who were companions were flying from
north to south on some business or other. They saw Ven. S›riputta—his head
newly shaven—sitting in the open air. Seeing him, the first yakkha said to the
second, “I’m inspired to give this contemplative a blow on the head.”
    When this was said, the second yakkha said to the first, “Enough of that, my
good friend. Don’t lay a hand on the contemplative. He’s an outstanding
contemplative, of great power & great might.”
    A second time, the first yakkha said to the second, “I’m inspired to give this
contemplative a blow on the head.”
    A second time, the second yakkha said to the first, “Enough of that, my good
friend. Don’t lay a hand on the contemplative. He’s an outstanding
contemplative, of great power & great might.”
     A third time, the first yakkha said to the second, “I’m inspired to give this
contemplative a blow on the head.”
    A third time, the second yakkha said to the first, “Enough of that, my good
friend. Don’t lay a hand on the contemplative. He’s an outstanding
contemplative, of great power & great might.”
    Then the first yakkha, ignoring the second yakkha, gave Ven. S›riputta a
blow on the head. And with that blow he might have knocked over an elephant
seven or eight cubits tall, or split a great rocky crag. But right there the yakkha—
yelling, “I’m burning!”—fell into the Great Hell.
    Now, Ven. Moggall›na—with his divine eye, pure and surpassing the
human—saw the yakkha give Ven. S›riputta a blow on the head. Seeing this, he
went to Ven. S›riputta and, on arrival, said to him, “I hope you are well, friend
S›riputta. I hope you are comfortable. I hope you are feeling no pain.”
                                                                                                66


   “I am well, friend Moggall›na. I am comfortable. But I do have a slight
headache.”
   “How amazing, friend S›riputta! How astounding! How great your power &
might! Just now a yakkha gave you a blow on the head. So great was that blow
that he might have knocked over an elephant seven or eight cubits tall, or split a
great rocky crag. But all you say is this: ‘I am well, friend Moggall›na. I am
comfortable. But I do have a slight headache’!”
   “How amazing, friend Moggall›na! How astounding! How great your power
& might! Where you saw a yakkha just now, I didn’t even see a dust devil!”
    The Blessed One—with the divine ear-property, pure and surpassing the
human—heard those two great beings conversing in this way. Then, on realizing
the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:

        Whose mind, standing like rock,
               doesn’t shake,
        dispassionate for things that spark passion,
        unprovoked by things that spark provocation:
               When one’s mind is developed like this,
               from where can there come to him
               suffering & stress?1


    N O T E : 1 . A variant of this verse is attributed to Ven. Khitaka at Thag 2:36 (verses 191-
192 in the PTS edition):
        Whose mind, standing like rock,
                doesn’t shake,
        dispassionate for things that spark passion,
        unprovoked by things that spark provocation?
                When one’s mind is developed like this,
                from where can there come to him
                suffering & stress?
        My mind, standing like rock,
                doesn’t shake,
        dispassionate for things that spark passion,
        unprovoked by things that spark provocation.
                When my mind is developed like this,
                from where can there come to me
                suffering & stress?

    See also: SN 21:3
                                                                                 67


   4:5 The Bull Elephant (N›ga Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Kosambı
at Kosita’s monastery. And on that occasion the Blessed One lived hemmed in
with monks, nuns, male & female lay followers, kings, royal ministers,
sectarians, & their disciples. Hemmed in, he lived unpleasantly and not in ease.
The thought occurred to him: “I now live hemmed in by monks, nuns, male &
female lay followers, kings, royal ministers, sectarians, & their disciples.
Hemmed in, I live unpleasantly and not in ease. What if I were to live alone,
apart from the crowd?”
    So, early in the morning, the Blessed One adjusted his under robe and—
carrying his bowl & robes—went into Kosambı for alms. Then, having gone for
alms in Kosambı, after the meal, returning from his alms round, he set his own
lodgings in order and, carrying his bowl & robes, without telling his attendant,
without informing the community of monks—alone & without a companion—
left on a wandering tour toward Palileyyaka. After wandering by stages, he
reached Palileyyaka. There he stayed in Palileyyaka in the protected forest grove
at the root of the auspicious sal tree.
   It so happened that a certain bull elephant was living hemmed in by
elephants, cow-elephants, calf-elephants, & baby elephants. He fed off grass with
cut-off tips. They chewed up his stash of broken-off branches. He drank
disturbed water. And when he came up from his bathing-place, cow-elephants
went along, banging up against his body. Hemmed in, he lived unpleasantly and
not in ease. The thought occurred to him: “I now live hemmed in by elephants,
cow-elephants, calf-elephants, & baby elephants. I feed off grass with cut-off tips.
They chew up my stash of broken-off branches. I drink disturbed water. And
when I come up from my bathing place, cow-elephants go along, banging up
against my body. Hemmed in, I live unpleasantly and not in ease. What if I were
to live alone, apart from the crowd?”
   So the bull elephant, leaving the herd, went to Palileyyaka, to the protected
forest grove and the root of the auspicious sal tree—to where the Blessed One
was staying. There he kept the grass down in the area where the Blessed One
was staying, and brought drinking water and washing water for the Blessed One
with his trunk.
   Then, when the Blessed One was alone in seclusion, this train of thought
appeared to his awareness: “Before, I lived hemmed in by monks, nuns, male &
female lay followers, kings, royal ministers, sectarians, & their disciples.
Hemmed in, I lived unpleasantly and not in ease. But now I live not hemmed in
by monks, nuns, male & female lay followers, kings, royal ministers, sectarians,
& their disciples. Not hemmed in, I live pleasantly and in ease.”
   And this train of thought appeared to the awareness of the bull elephant,
“Before, I lived hemmed in by elephants, cow-elephants, calf-elephants, & baby
elephants. I fed off grass with cut-off tips. They chewed up my stash of broken-
off branches. I drank disturbed water. And when I came up from my bathing
place, cow-elephants went along, banging up against my body. Hemmed in, I
lived unpleasantly and not in ease. But now I live not hemmed in by elephants,
                                                                                               68


cow-elephants, calf-elephants, & baby elephants. I feed off grass with uncut tips.
They don’t chew up my stash of broken-off branches. I drink undisturbed water.
When I come up from my bathing place, cow-elephants don’t go along, banging
up against my body. Not hemmed in, I live pleasantly and in ease.”1
   Then the Blessed One, realizing his own seclusion and knowing the train of
thought in the bull elephant’s awareness, on that occasion exclaimed:

               This
               harmonizes
                   mind       with mind—
        the great one’s       with the great one’s2 —
        the elephant with tusks like chariot poles:
               that each finds joy,
                       alone,
               in the forest.


    NO TES
    1. Mv.X.4.6-7 places the story of the elephant’s service to the Buddha in the context of the
quarrel at Kosambı, but the details of how the Buddha left Kosambı given in Mv.X.3 are
different.
    2. Great one = n›ga. This term can mean magical serpent or large elephant, and is often
used as an epithet for an arahant.

    See also: AN 9:40




    4:6 Pi˚˜ola (Pi˚˜ola Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. Pi˚˜ola
Bh›radv›ja was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body
held erect—a wilderness dweller, an alms-goer, a rag-robe wearer, an owner of
only one set of three robes, modest, content, solitary, unentangled, his
persistence aroused, an advocate of the ascetic practices, devoted to the
heightened mind. The Blessed One saw Ven. Pi˚˜ola Bh›radv›ja sitting not far
away, his legs crossed, his body held erect—a wilderness dweller, an alms-goer,
a rag-robe wearer, an owner of only one set of three robes, modest, content,
solitary, unentangled, his persistence aroused, an advocate of the ascetic
practices, devoted to the heightened mind.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:
                                                                                             69


        Not disparaging, not injuring,
        restraint       in line with the P›˛imokkha,
        moderation in food,
        dwelling        in seclusion,
        commitment to the heightened mind:
               this is the teaching
               of the Awakened.1


   N O T E : 1 . This verse also occurs at Dhp 185, where it forms part of a set including Dhp
183–184:
        The non-doing of any evil,
        the performance           of what’s skillful,
        the cleansing of one’s own mind:
                this is the teaching
                of the Awakened.
        Patient endurance:
                 the foremost austerity.
        Unbinding:
                 the foremost,
                 so say the Awakened.
        He who injures another
        is no contemplative.
        He who mistreats another,
                 no monk.




    4:7 S›riputta (S›riputta Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. S›riputta
was sitting not far from the Blessed One—his legs crossed, his body held erect—
modest, content, solitary, unentangled, his persistence aroused, devoted to the
heightened mind. The Blessed One saw Ven. S›riputta sitting not far away—his
legs crossed, his body held erect—modest, content, solitary, unentangled, his
persistence aroused, devoted to the heightened mind.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Of heightened awareness & heedful,
        the sage trained in sagacity’s way:
        He has no sorrows, one who is Such,
        calmed & ever mindful.1
                                                                                             70



    N O T E : 1 . This is the verse that Ven. CÒ˘a Panthaka used to exhort the nuns in the origin
story to P›cittiya 22. It also appears at Thag 1:68.



    4:8 Sundarı (Sundarı Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. Now at that time the Blessed One
was worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given homage—a recipient
of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. The community
of monks was also worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given
homage—a recipient of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the
sick. But the wanderers of other sects were not worshipped, revered, honored,
venerated, or given homage; nor were they recipients of robes, alms food,
lodgings, or medicinal requisites for the sick.
    So the wanderers of other sects—unable to stand the veneration given to the
Blessed One and the community of monks—went to Sundarı the female
wanderer and, on arrival, said to her, “Sundarı, would you dare to do something
for the benefit of your kinsmen?”
    “What shall I do, masters? What can I not do?1 I have given up even my life
for the benefit of my kinsmen!”
    “In that case, sister, go often to Jeta’s Grove.”
    Responding, “As you say, masters,” to those wanderers of other sects,
Sundarı the female wanderer went often to Jeta’s Grove. When the wanderers of
other sects knew that many people had seen Sundarı the female wanderer going
often to Jeta’s Grove, then—having murdered her and buried her right there in
the moat-ditch surrounding Jeta’s Grove—they went to King Pasenadi Kosala
and, on arrival, said to him, “Great king, we can’t find Sundarı the female
wanderer.”
    “But where do you suspect she is?”
    “At Jeta’s Grove, great king.”
    “Then in that case, search Jeta’s Grove.”
    Then those wanderers of other sects, having searched Jeta’s Grove, having
dug up what they had buried in the surrounding moat-ditch, having mounted it
on a litter, took it into S›vatthı and went from street to street, crossroad to
crossroad, stirring up people’s indignation: “See, masters, the handiwork of the
Sakyan-son contemplatives. They’re shameless, these Sakyan-son
contemplatives: unvirtuous, evil-natured, liars, unholy, though they claim to be
practicing the Dhamma, practicing what is harmonious, practicing the holy life,
speakers of the truth, virtuous, fine-natured. They have no quality of a
contemplative, no holy quality. Destroyed is their quality of a contemplative!
Destroyed is their holy quality! From where is their quality of a contemplative?
From where, their holy quality? Gone are they from any quality of a
contemplative! Gone from any holy quality! How can a man, having done a
man’s business with a woman, take her life?”
                                                                               71


    So on that occasion, people seeing monks in S›vatthı would insult, revile,
irritate, & harass them with discourteous, abusive language: “They’re shameless,
these Sakyan-son contemplatives: unvirtuous, evil-natured, liars, unholy, though
they claim to be practicing the Dhamma, practicing what is harmonious,
practicing the holy life, speakers of the truth, virtuous, fine-natured. They have
no quality of a contemplative, no holy quality. Destroyed is their quality of a
contemplative! Destroyed is their holy quality! From where is their quality of a
contemplative? From where, their holy quality? Gone are they from any quality
of a contemplative! Gone from any holy quality! How can a man, having done a
man’s business with a woman, take her life?”
    Then, early in the morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. Then,
having gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms
round, they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there they said to the Blessed One, “At
present, lord, people seeing monks in S›vatthı insult, revile, irritate, & harass
them with discourteous, abusive language: ‘They’re shameless, these Sakyan-son
contemplatives: unvirtuous, evil-natured, liars, unholy.… How can a man,
having done a man’s business with a woman, take her life?’”
   “Monks, this noise will not last long. It will last only seven days. With the
passing of seven days, it will disappear. So in that case, when those people, on
seeing monks, insult, revile, irritate, & harass them with discourteous, abusive
language, counter their accusation with this verse:
      “He goes to hell,
      the one who asserts
      what didn’t take place,
      as does the one
      who, having done,
      says, ‘I didn’t.’
      Both—low-acting people—
      there become equal:
      after death, in the world beyond.”2
   So, having learned this verse in the Blessed One’s presence, the monks—
whenever people, on seeing monks in S›vatthı, insulted, reviled, irritated, &
harassed them with discourteous, abusive language—countered the accusation
with this verse:
      “He goes to hell,
      the one who asserts
      what didn’t take place,
      as does the one
      who, having done,
      says, ‘I didn’t.’
      Both—low-acting people—
      there become equal:
      after death, in the world beyond.”
                                                                                            72


    The thought occurred to those people, “They’re innocent, these Sakyan-son
contemplatives. It wasn’t done by them. They’re taking an oath, these Sakyan-
son contemplatives.”3 And so that noise didn’t last long. It lasted only seven
days. With the passing of seven days, it disappeared.
    Then a large number of monks went to the Blessed One and, on arrival,
having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said
to him, “It’s amazing, lord. It’s astounding—how well-said that was by the
Blessed One: ‘Monks, this noise will not last long. It will last only seven days.
With the passing of seven days, it will disappear.’ Lord, that noise has
disappeared.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        They stab with their words
            —people unrestrained—
        as they do, with arrows,
        a tusker gone into battle.4
        Hearing abusive words spoken,
        one should endure them:
            a monk with unbothered mind.


    NO TES
     1. Following the Sri Lankan and Burmese editions. In the Thai edition, this sentence reads,
less effectively, “What can I do?”
     2. This verse = Dhp 306.
     3. Reading na imehi kataª, sapant’ime sama˚› sakya-puttiy› with the Sri Lankan and Burmese
editions. The Thai reads, less grammatically, na imehi kataª, p›pant’ime sama˚› sakya-puttiy›.
     4. Because sarehi can mean either “with arrows” or “with voices,” this verse can also be
translated:
            They goad with their words
                 —people unrestrained—
            as they do, with shouts,
            a tusker gone into battle.
    The verse thus yields two equally valid interpretations:
    a) The people stabbing the elephant with arrows (sarehi) are enemy soldiers, trying to
bring it down.
    b) The people goading the elephant with their shouts and voices (sarehi) are soldiers
fighting on the same side as the elephant, urging it to charge into danger.
    The Commentary gives only the first interpretation. But if we accept both interpretations,
the verse contains a more useful double warning: When there’s a controversy, beware of the
unrestrained people on both sides. Learn to endure the hurtful words of those on the other side
who want to bring you down, and the hurtful words of those on your side who try to rouse your
anger so that you will say something rash.
                                                                                           73




   4:9 Upasena Vaºgantaputta (Upasena Vaºgantaputta Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near R›jagaha
at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. And on that occasion, when Ven.
Upasena Vaºgantaputta was alone in seclusion, this line of thinking appeared to
his awareness: “What a gain, what a true gain it is for me that my teacher is the
Blessed One, worthy and fully self-awakened; that I have gone forth from home
to the homeless life in a well-taught Dhamma & Vinaya; that my companions in
the holy life are virtuous and endowed with admirable qualities; that I have
achieved culmination in terms of the precepts; that my mind is unified and well-
concentrated; that I am an arahant, with effluents ended; that I have great power
& great might. Fortunate has been my life; fortunate will be my death.”
    Then the Blessed One, comprehending with his awareness the line of thinking
that had appeared to Ven. Upasena Vaºgantaputta’s awareness, on that occasion
exclaimed:

       He doesn’t regret
              what life has been,
       doesn’t grieve
              at death,
       if—enlightened1 —
              he has seen that state.
       He doesn’t grieve
       in the midst of grief.
       For one who has crushed
       craving for becoming—
       the monk of peaceful mind—
       birth & the wandering on
              are totally ended.
       He has no further becoming.2


   NO TES
    1. Enlightened (dhıra): Throughout this translation I have rendered buddha as “awakened,”
and dhıra as “enlightened.” As Jan Gonda points out in his book, The Vision of the Vedic Poets,
the word dhıra was used in Vedic and Buddhist poetry to mean a person who has the
heightened powers of mental vision needed to perceive the “light” of the underlying
principles of the cosmos, together with the expertise to implement those principles in the
affairs of life and to reveal them to others. A person enlightened in this sense may also be
awakened, but is not necessarily so.
    2. This last verse is identical with a verse in Sn 3:12 (verse 746 in the PTS edition).
                                                                                74



   4:10 S›riputta (S›riputta Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. S›riputta
was sitting not far from the Blessed One—his legs crossed, his body held erect—
reflecting on the peace within himself. The Blessed One saw Ven. S›riputta sitting
not far away—his legs crossed, his body held erect—reflecting on the peace
within himself.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       For the monk whose mind is
              peaceful, at peace,
       whose cord is cut,1
       birth & the wandering on
              are totally ended.
       Freed is he
       from M›ra’s bonds.


   N O T E : 1 . The cord (to becoming) is craving.




       5 : So˚a the Elder


   5:1 The King (R›jan Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion King Pasenadi
Kosala had gone with Queen Mallik› to the upper palace. Then he said to her,
“Mallik›, is there anyone dearer to you than yourself?”
    “No, great king. There is no one dearer to me than myself. And what about
you, great king? Is there anyone dearer to you than yourself?”
    “No, Mallik›. There is no one dearer to me than myself.”
    Then the king, descending from the palace, went to the Blessed One and, on
arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, he
said to the Blessed One, “Just now, when I had gone with Queen Mallik› to the
upper palace, I said to her, ‘Mallik›, is there anyone dearer to you than yourself?’
    “When this was said, she said to me, ‘No, great king. There is no one dearer
to me than myself. And what about you, great king? Is there anyone dearer to
you than yourself?’
    “When this was said, I said to her, ‘No, Mallik›. There is no one dearer to me
than myself.’”
                                                                                   75


   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      Searching all directions
      with your awareness,
      you find no one dearer
             than yourself.
      In the same way, others
      are thickly dear to themselves.
      So you shouldn’t hurt others
             if you love yourself.



   5:2 Short-lived (App›yuka Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. Then Ven. finanda, emerging from
his seclusion in the late afternoon, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival,
having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the
Blessed One, “It’s amazing, sir. It’s astounding—how short-lived the Blessed
One’s mother was. Seven days after the Blessed One’s birth she died and
reappeared among the Contented [Tusita] (deva-) group.”
    “That’s the way it is, finanda. That’s the way it is, for the mothers of
bodhisattas are short-lived. Seven days after the bodhisattas’ birth, the
bodhisattas’ mothers pass away and reappear among the Contented (deva-)
group.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      Those who have come to be,
      those who will be:
              All
              will go,
      leaving the body behind.
      The skillful person,
      realizing the loss of all,
      should live the holy life
              ardently.



   5:3 The Leper (Ku˛˛hi Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near R›jagaha
at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. And on that occasion in R›jagaha
                                                                                    76


there was a leper named Suppabuddha, a poor, miserable wretch of a person.
And on that occasion the Blessed One was sitting surrounded by a large
assembly, teaching the Dhamma. Suppabuddha the leper saw the large
gathering of people from afar and thought to himself, “Without a doubt,
someone must be distributing staple or non-staple food there. Why don’t I go
over to that large group of people, and maybe there I’ll get some staple or non-
staple food.” So he went over to the large group of people. Then he saw the
Blessed One sitting surrounded by a large assembly, teaching the Dhamma. On
seeing this, he realized, “There’s no one distributing staple or non-staple food
there. That’s Gotama the contemplative (sitting) surrounded, teaching the
Dhamma. Why don’t I listen to the Dhamma?” So he sat down to one side right
there, [thinking,] “I, too, will listen to the Dhamma.”
     Then the Blessed One, having encompassed the awareness of the entire
assembly with his awareness, asked himself, “Now who here is capable of
understanding the Dhamma?” He saw Suppabuddha the leper sitting in the
assembly, and on seeing him the thought occurred to him, “This person here is
capable of understanding the Dhamma.” So, aiming at Suppabuddha the leper,
he gave a step-by-step talk, i.e., he proclaimed a talk on generosity, on virtue, on
heaven; he declared the drawbacks, degradation, & corruption of sensuality, and
the rewards of renunciation. Then when the Blessed One knew that
Suppabuddha the leper’s mind was ready, malleable, free from hindrances,
elevated, & clear, he then gave the Dhamma-talk peculiar to Awakened Ones,
i.e., stress, origination, cessation, & path. And just as a clean cloth, free of stains,
would properly absorb a dye, in the same way, as Suppabuddha the leper was
sitting in that very seat, the dustless, stainless Dhamma eye arose within him,
“Whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation.”
     Having seen the Dhamma, reached the Dhamma, known the Dhamma,
gained a foothold in the Dhamma, having crossed over & beyond doubt, having
had no more perplexity, having gained fearlessness & independence from others
with regard to the Teacher’s message, he got up from his seat and went to the
Blessed One. On arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed One, he sat to one
side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, “Magnificent, lord!
Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal
what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into
the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has the
Blessed One—through many lines of reasoning—made the Dhamma clear. I go
to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Community of monks.
May the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for
refuge, from this day forward, for life.”
     Then Suppabuddha the leper, having been instructed, urged, roused, &
encouraged by the Blessed One’s Dhamma talk, delighting in & approving of the
Blessed One’s words, got up from his seat, bowed down to the Blessed One and
left, circling him to the right. Not long after his departure he was attacked &
killed by a cow with a young calf.
     Then a large number of monks went to the Blessed One and, on arrival,
having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said
                                                                                              77


to the Blessed One, “Lord, the leper named Suppabuddha, whom the Blessed
One instructed, urged, roused, & encouraged with a Dhamma talk, has died.
What is his destination? What is his future state?”
    “Monks, Suppabuddha the leper was wise. He practiced the Dhamma in
accordance with the Dhamma and did not pester me with issues related to the
Dhamma. With the destruction of the first three fetters, he is a stream-winner,
not subject to states of deprivation, headed for self-awakening for sure.”
    When this was said, one of the monks said to the Blessed One, “Lord, what
was the cause, what was the reason, why Suppabuddha the leper was such a
poor, miserable wretch of a person?”
    “Once, monks, in this very R›jagaha, Suppabuddha the leper was the son of a
rich money-lender. While being escorted to a pleasure park, he saw Tagarasikhin
the Private Buddha1 going for alms in the city. On seeing him, the thought
occurred to him, ‘Who is this leper prowling about?’ Spitting and disrespectfully
turning his left side to Tagarasikhin the Private Buddha, he left. As a result of that
deed he boiled in hell for many years, many hundreds of years, many thousands
of years, many hundreds of thousands of years. And then as a remainder of the
result of that deed he became a poor, miserable wretch of a person in this very
R›jagaha. But on encountering the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the
Tath›gata, he acquired conviction, virtue, learning, relinquishment, &
discernment. Having acquired conviction, virtue, learning, relinquishment, &
discernment on encountering the Dhamma & Vinaya made known by the
Tath›gata, now—on the break-up of the body, after death—he has reappeared
in a good destination, the heavenly world, in company with the devas of the
heaven of the Thirty-three. There he outshines the other devas both in beauty &
in rank.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        As one with eyes & having energy
               would
                     treacherous, uneven places,
        so a wise one, in the world of life,
               should
               avoid
                     evil deeds.2


    NO TES
     1. A Private Buddha is one who gains awakening without relying on the teachings of
others, but who cannot formulate the Dhamma to teach others in the way a Full Buddha can.
     2. This verse is an example of a “lamp”—a poetic figure explained in the note to Ud 1:3. In
this case the lamp-word is “would/should avoid.”
                                                                              78



   5:4 Boys (Kum›ra Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion, a large
number of boys on the road between S›vatthı & Jeta’s Grove were catching fish.
Then early in the morning the Blessed One adjusted his under robe and—
carrying his bowl & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. He saw the large
number of boys on the road between S›vatthı & Jeta’s Grove catching little fish.
Seeing them, he went up to them and, on arrival, said to them, “Boys, do you
fear pain? Do you dislike pain?”
    “Yes, lord, we fear pain. We dislike pain.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      If you fear pain,
      if you dislike pain,
      don’t anywhere do an evil deed
      in open or in secret.
      If you’re doing or will do
      an evil deed,
      you won’t escape pain
             catching up
             as you run away.



   5:5 Uposatha (Uposatha Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Mig›ra’s mother. And on that occasion,
the Blessed One—it being the observance day—was sitting surrounded by the
community of monks. Then Ven. finanda—when the night was far advanced, at
the end of the first watch—got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one
shoulder, stood facing the Blessed One, paying homage with his hands placed
palm-to-palm over his heart, and said to him, “Lord, the night is far advanced.
The first watch has ended. The community of monks has been sitting here long.
May the Blessed One recite the P›˛imokkha to them.” When this was said, the
Blessed One remained silent.
    Then a second time, when the night was far advanced, at the end of the
middle watch, Ven. finanda got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one
shoulder, stood facing the Blessed One, paying homage with his hands placed
palm-to-palm over his heart, and said to him, “Lord, the night is far advanced.
The second watch has ended. The community of monks has been sitting here
long. May the Blessed One recite the P›˛imokkha to them.” When this was said,
the Blessed One remained silent.
                                                                                79


    Then a third time, when the night was far advanced, at the end of the last
watch, as dawn was approaching and the face of the night was beaming, Ven.
finanda got up from his seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, stood facing
the Blessed One, paying homage with his hands placed palm-to-palm over his
heart, and said to him, “Lord, the night is far advanced. The last watch has
ended. Dawn is approaching and the face of the night is beaming. The
community of monks has been sitting here long. May the Blessed One recite the
P›˛imokkha to the community of monks.”
    “finanda, the gathering isn’t pure.”
    Then the thought occurred to Ven. Mah› Moggall›na: “In reference to which
individual did the Blessed One just now say, ‘finanda, the gathering isn’t pure’?”
So he directed his mind, encompassing with his awareness the awareness of the
entire community of monks. He saw that individual—unprincipled, evil, unclean
and suspect in his undertakings, hidden in his actions, not a contemplative
though claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so,
inwardly rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—sitting in the midst of the
community of monks. On seeing him, he got up, went over to that individual,
and on reaching him said, “Get up, friend. You have been seen by the Blessed
One. You have no affiliation with the community of monks.” Then the individual
remained silent. A second time.… A third time, Ven. Mah› Moggall›na said, “Get
up, friend. You have been seen by the Blessed One. You have no affiliation with
the community of monks.” And for a third time the individual remained silent.
    Then Ven. Mah› Moggall›na, grabbing that individual by the arm, having
expelled him through the outside door of the porch and locking the bolt,
approached the Blessed One and on arrival said, “I have expelled that individual,
lord. The gathering is now pure. Let the Blessed One recite the P›˛imokkha to
the community of monks.”
    “Isn’t it amazing, Moggall›na. Isn’t it astounding, how that worthless man
waited until he was grabbed by the arm.” Then the Blessed One addressed the
monks: “From now on I will no longer perform the observance or recite the
P›˛imokkha. From now on, you alone, monks, will perform the observance and
recite the P›˛imokkha. It is impossible, it cannot happen, that a Tath›gata would
perform the observance or recite the P›˛imokkha with an impure gathering.
    “Monks, there are these eight amazing & astounding qualities of the ocean
because of which, as they see them again & again, the asuras take great joy in the
ocean. Which eight?
    “[1] The ocean has a gradual shelf, a gradual slope, a gradual inclination, with
a sudden drop-off only after a long stretch.1 The fact that the ocean has a gradual
shelf, a gradual slope, a gradual inclination, with a sudden drop-off only after a
long stretch: This is the first amazing & astounding quality of the ocean because
of which, as they see it again & again, the asuras take great joy in the ocean.
    “[2] And furthermore, the ocean is stable and does not overstep its tideline.…
This is the second amazing & astounding quality of the ocean because of which,
as they see it again & again, the asuras take great joy in the ocean.
    “[3] And furthermore, the ocean does not tolerate a dead body. Any dead
body in the ocean gets quickly washed to the shore and thrown up on dry
                                                                                 80


land.… This is the third amazing & astounding quality of the ocean because of
which, as they see it again & again, the asuras take great joy in the ocean.
    “[4] And furthermore, whatever great rivers there are—such as the Ganges,
the Yamun›, the Aciravatı, the SarabhÒ, the Mahı—on reaching the ocean, give
up their former names and are classed simply as ‘ocean’.… This is the fourth
amazing & astounding quality of the ocean because of which, as they see it again
& again, the asuras take great joy in the ocean.
    “[5] And furthermore, though the rivers of the world pour into the ocean,
and rains fall from the sky, no swelling or diminishing in the ocean for that
reason can be discerned.… This is the fifth amazing & astounding quality of the
ocean because of which, as they see it again & again, the asuras take great joy in
the ocean.
    “[6] And furthermore, the ocean has a single taste: that of salt.… This is the
sixth amazing & astounding quality of the ocean because of which, as they see it
again & again, the asuras take great joy in the ocean.
    “[7] And furthermore, the ocean has these many treasures of various kinds:
pearls, sapphires, lapis lazuli, shells, quartz, coral, silver, gold, rubies, & cat’s
eyes.… This is the seventh amazing & astounding quality of the ocean because of
which, as they see it again & again, the asuras take great joy in the ocean.
    “[8] And furthermore, the ocean is the abode of such mighty beings as these:
whales, whale-eaters, & whale-eater-eaters; asuras, n›gas, & gandhabbas. There
are in the ocean beings one hundred leagues long, two hundred… three
hundred… four hundred… five hundred leagues long. The fact that the ocean is
the abode of such mighty beings as these: whales, whale-eaters, & whale-eater-
eaters; asuras, n›gas, & gandhabbas; and there are in the ocean beings one
hundred leagues long, two hundred… three hundred… four hundred… five
hundred leagues long: This is the eighth amazing & astounding quality of the
ocean because of which, as they see it again & again, the asuras take great joy in
the ocean.
    “These are the eight amazing & astounding qualities of the ocean because of
which, as they see them again & again, the asuras take great joy in the ocean.
    “In the same way, monks, there are eight amazing & astounding qualities of
this Dhamma & Vinaya because of which, as they see them again & again, the
monks take great joy in this Dhamma & Vinaya. Which eight?
    “[1] Just as the ocean has a gradual shelf, a gradual slope, a gradual
inclination, with a sudden drop-off only after a long stretch; in the same way this
Dhamma & Vinaya has a gradual training, a gradual performance, a gradual
practice, with a penetration to gnosis only after a long stretch. The fact that this
Dhamma & Vinaya has a gradual training, a gradual performance, a gradual
practice, with a penetration to gnosis only after a long stretch: This is the first
amazing & astounding quality of this Dhamma & Vinaya because of which, as
they see it again & again, the monks take great joy in this Dhamma & Vinaya.
    “[2] And furthermore, just as the ocean is stable and does not overstep its
tideline; in the same way my disciples do not—even for the sake of their lives—
overstep the training rules I have formulated for them.… This is the second
                                                                                 81


amazing & astounding quality of this Dhamma & Vinaya because of which, as
they see it again & again, the monks take great joy in this Dhamma & Vinaya.
    “[3] And furthermore, just as the ocean does not tolerate a dead body—any
dead body in the ocean getting quickly washed to the shore and thrown up on
dry land—in the same way, if an individual is unprincipled, evil, unclean &
suspect in his undertakings, hidden in his actions—not a contemplative though
claiming to be one, not leading the holy life though claiming to do so, inwardly
rotten, oozing with desire, filthy by nature—the community has no affiliation
with him. Having quickly gathered together, they suspend him from the
community. Even though he may be sitting in the midst of the community of
monks, he is far from the community, and the community far from him.… This
is the third amazing & astounding quality of this Dhamma & Vinaya because of
which, as they see it again & again, the monks take great joy in this Dhamma &
Vinaya.
    “[4] And furthermore, just as whatever great rivers there are—such as the
Ganges, the Yamun›, the Aciravatı, the SarabhÒ, the Mahı—on reaching the
ocean, give up their former names and are classed simply as ‘ocean’; in the same
way, when members of the four castes—noble warriors, brahmans, merchants,
& workers—go forth from home to the homeless life in this Dhamma & Vinaya
declared by the Tath›gata, they give up their former names and clans and are
classed simply as ‘contemplatives, sons of the Sakyan’.… This is the fourth
amazing & astounding quality of this Dhamma & Vinaya because of which, as
they see it again & again, the monks take great joy in this Dhamma & Vinaya.
    “[5] And furthermore, just as the rivers of the world pour into the ocean, and
rains fall from the sky, but no swelling or diminishing in the ocean for that
reason can be discerned; in the same way, although many monks are totally
unbound into the property of unbinding with no fuel remaining, no swelling or
diminishing in the property of unbinding for that reason can be discerned.… This
is the fifth amazing & astounding quality of this Dhamma & Vinaya because of
which, as they see it again & again, the monks take great joy in this Dhamma &
Vinaya.
    “[6] And furthermore, just as the ocean has a single taste—that of salt—in the
same way, this Dhamma & Vinaya has a single taste: that of release.… This is the
sixth amazing & astounding quality of this Dhamma & Vinaya because of which,
as they see it again & again, the monks take great joy in this Dhamma & Vinaya.
    “[7] And furthermore, just as the ocean has these many treasures of various
kinds—pearls, sapphires, lapis lazuli, shells, quartz, coral, silver, gold, rubies, &
cat’s eyes—in the same way, this Dhamma & Vinaya has these many treasures of
various kinds: the four establishings of mindfulness, the four right exertions, the
four bases of power, the five faculties, the five strengths, the seven factors for
awakening, the noble eightfold path.… This is the seventh amazing &
astounding quality of this Dhamma & Vinaya because of which, as they see it
again & again, the monks take great joy in this Dhamma & Vinaya.
    “[8] And furthermore, just as the ocean is the abode of such mighty beings as
these: whales, whale-eaters, & whale-eater-eaters; asuras, n›gas, & gandhabbas,
and there are in the ocean beings one hundred leagues long, two hundred…
                                                                                                82


three hundred… four hundred… five hundred leagues long; in the same way,
this Dhamma & Vinaya is the abode of such mighty beings as these: stream-
winners & those practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry; once-returners &
those practicing to realize the fruit of once-returning; non-returners & those
practicing to realize the fruit of non-returning; arahants & those practicing for
arahantship. The fact that this Dhamma & Vinaya is the abode of such mighty
beings as these—stream-winners & those practicing to realize the fruit of stream-
entry; once-returners & those practicing to realize the fruit of once-returning;
non-returners & those practicing to realize the fruit of non-returning; arahants &
those practicing for arahantship: This is the eighth amazing & astounding quality
of this Dhamma & Vinaya because of which, as they see it again & again, the
monks take great joy in this Dhamma & Vinaya.
    “These are the eight amazing & astounding qualities of this Dhamma &
Vinaya because of which, as they see them again & again, the monks take great
joy in this Dhamma & Vinaya.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Rain soddens what’s covered
        & doesn’t sodden what’s open.
        So open up what’s covered up,
        so that it won’t get soddened by the rain.2


    NO TES
     1. The Pali here reads, na ›yataken’eva pap›to. The Commentary insists that this phrase
means, “with no abrupt drop-off.” There are three reasons for not accepting the Commentary’s
interpretation here. (a) The first is grammatical. The word ›yataka means “long, drawn out;
lasting a long time.” To interpret ›yatakena, the instrumental of a word meaning “long, drawn
out,” to mean “abrupt” makes little sense. (b) The second reason is geographical. The
continental shelf off the east coast of India does have a sudden drop-off after a long gradual
slope. (c) The third reason is doctrinal. As noted in the interpretation of the simile, the shape of
the ocean floor corresponds to the course of the practice. If there were no sudden drop-off, there
would be no sudden penetration to awakening. However, there are many cases of sudden
penetration in the Canon, Exhibit A being B›hiya’s attainment of arahantship in Ud 1:10.
     2. This verse also appears among the verses attributed to Ven. Sirima˚˜a at Thag 6:13
(verse 447 in the PTS edition).

    See also: AN 3:129
                                                                                  83


   5:6 So˚a (So˚a Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. Mah›
Kacc›yana was living among the people of Avantı on Pavatta Mountain near the
Osprey Habitat. And at that time the lay follower So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a was Ven.
Mah› Kacc›yana’s supporter. Then as So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a was alone in seclusion,
this train of thought appeared to his awareness: “According to the Dhamma that
Master Mah› Kacc›yana teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy
life totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off
my hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life
into homelessness?”
     So he went to Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana and on arrival, having bowed down to
Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to Ven.
Mah› Kacc›yana, “Just now, venerable sir, as I was alone in seclusion, this train
of thought appeared to my awareness: ‘According to the Dhamma that Master
Mah› Kacc›yana teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life
totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off my
hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into
homelessness?’ Give me the going-forth, Master Mah› Kacc›yana!”
     When this was said, Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana said to So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a, “It’s hard,
So˚a, the life-long, one-meal-a-day, sleeping-alone holy life. Please, right there as
you are a householder, devote yourself to the message of the Awakened Ones
and to the proper-time [i.e., uposatha day], one-meal-a-day, sleeping-alone holy
life.” And so So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a’s idea of going-forth subsided.
     Then a second time as So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a was alone in seclusion, this train of
thought appeared to his awareness: “According to the Dhamma that Master
Mah› Kacc›yana teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life
totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off my
hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into
homelessness?”
     So he went to Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana and on arrival, having bowed down to
Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to Ven.
Mah› Kacc›yana, “Just now, venerable sir, as I was alone in seclusion, this train
of thought appeared to my awareness: ‘According to the Dhamma that Master
Mah› Kacc›yana teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life
totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off my
hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into
homelessness?’ Give me the going-forth, Master Mah› Kacc›yana!”
     When this was said, Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana said to So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a, “It’s hard,
So˚a, the life-long, one-meal-a-day, sleeping-alone holy life. Please, right there as
you are a householder, devote yourself to the message of the Awakened Ones
and to the proper-time, one-meal-a-day, sleeping-alone holy life.” And so So˚a
Ko˛ika˚˚a’s idea of going-forth subsided a second time.
     Then a third time as So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a was alone in seclusion, this train of
thought appeared to his awareness: “According to the Dhamma that Master
                                                                                  84


Mah› Kacc›yana teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life
totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off my
hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into
homelessness?”
     So he went to Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana and on arrival, having bowed down to
Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to Ven.
Mah› Kacc›yana, “Just now, venerable sir, as I was alone in seclusion, this train
of thought appeared to my awareness: ‘According to the Dhamma that Master
Mah› Kacc›yana teaches, it’s not easy living at home to practice the holy life
totally perfect, totally pure, like a polished shell. What if I were to shave off my
hair & beard, put on the ochre robes, and go forth from the household life into
homelessness?’ Give me the going-forth, Master Mah› Kacc›yana!”
     So Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana gave So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a the going-forth.
     Now at that time the southern country of Avantı was short of monks. So
only after three years—having gathered from here & there with hardship &
difficulty a quorum-of-ten community of monks1—did Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana
give full admission to Ven. So˚a. Then, after having completed the Rains retreat,
as he was alone in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to Ven. So˚a’s
awareness: “I haven’t seen the Blessed One face-to-face. I’ve simply heard that he
is like this and like this. If my preceptor would give me permission, I would go to
see the Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened.”
     So, leaving seclusion in the late afternoon, he went to Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana
and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting
there, he said to Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana, “Just now, venerable sir, as I was alone
in seclusion, this train of thought appeared to my awareness: ‘I haven’t seen the
Blessed One face-to-face. I’ve simply heard that he is like this and like this. If my
preceptor would give me permission, I would go to see the Blessed One, worthy
& rightly self-awakened.’”
     “Good, So˚a. Very good. Go, So˚a, to see the Blessed One, worthy & rightly
self-awakened. You will see the Blessed One who is serene & inspires serene
confidence, his senses at peace, his mind at peace, one who has attained the
utmost tranquility & poise, tamed, guarded, his senses restrained, a Great One
(n›ga). On seeing him, showing reverence with your head to his feet in my
name,2 ask whether he is free from illness & affliction, is carefree, strong, & living
in comfort, [saying: ‘My preceptor, lord, shows reverence with his head to your
feet and asks whether you are free from illness & affliction, are carefree, strong,
& living in comfort.’”]3
     Saying, “As you say, venerable sir,” Ven. So˚a—delighting in & approving of
Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana’s words—got up from his seat, bowed down to Ven.
Mah› Kacc›yana, circled him to the right, set his lodging in order, and—taking
his bowl & robes—set off wandering toward S›vatthı. Wandering by stages, he
arrived at S›vatthı, Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. He went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he
was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One, “Lord, my preceptor, Ven. Mah›
Kacc›yana, shows reverence with his head to the Blessed One’s feet and asks
                                                                                          85


whether the Blessed One is free from illness & affliction, is carefree, strong, &
living in comfort.”
    “Are you well, monk? Are you in good health? Have you come along the
road with only a little fatigue? And are you not tired of alms-food?”
    “I am well, Blessed One. I am in good health, Blessed One. I have come along
the road, lord, with only a little fatigue and I am not tired of alms-food.”
    Then the Blessed One addressed Ven. finanda, saying, “finanda, prepare
bedding for this visiting monk.”
    Then the thought occurred to Ven. finanda, “When the Blessed One orders
me, ‘finanda, prepare bedding for this visiting monk,’ he wants to stay in the
same dwelling with that monk. The Blessed One wants to stay in the same
dwelling with Ven. So˚a.” So he prepared bedding for Ven. So˚a in the dwelling
in which the Blessed One was staying. Then the Blessed One, having spent much
of the night sitting in the open air, washed his feet and entered the dwelling.
Likewise, Ven. So˚a, having spent much of the night sitting in the open air,
washed his feet and entered the dwelling. Then, getting up toward the end of the
night, the Blessed One invited Ven. Mah› So˚a,4 saying, “Monk, I would like you
to recite the Dhamma.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. So˚a chanted all
sixteen parts of the A˛˛haka Vagga.5 The Blessed One, at the conclusion of Ven.
So˚a’s intonation, expressed high approval: “Good, monk. Very good. You have
learned the A˛˛haka Vagga [verses] well, have considered them well, have borne
them well in mind. You have a fine delivery, clear & faultless, that makes the
meaning intelligible. How many Rains [in the monkhood] do you have?”
    “I have one Rains, Blessed One.”
    “But why did you take so long [to ordain]?”
    “For a long time, lord, I have seen the drawbacks in sensuality, but the
household life is confining with many duties, many things to be done.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Seeing the drawbacks of the world,
       knowing the state without acquisitions,
       a noble one doesn’t find joy in evil,
       in evil
               a clean one doesn’t find joy.6


   NO TES
     1. Originally, a quorum of at least ten monks was required to ordain a new monk. In the
version of this story given in the Vinaya (Mv.V.13.1-13), Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana sends a request
to the Buddha via Ven. So˚a that some of the Vinaya rules be relaxed outside of the middle
Ganges valley, one of them being that the quorum required for ordination be reduced. As a
result, the Buddha amended the relevant rule, stating that the quorum of ten was needed only
within the middle Ganges valley, and that outside of the middle Ganges valley a quorum of
                                                                                              86


five would be sufficient to ordain a new monk, provided that at least one of the five be
knowledgeable in the Vinaya.
     2. The remainder of this paragraph does not appear in Mv.V.13.5. However, at this point in
the story, Mv.V.13.5-7 inserts Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana’s request that Ven. So˚a, in his name, ask
the Buddha to rescind four of the monks’ rules in the Southern region, and that he explain a
procedure dealing with gifts of cloth that Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana found unclear.
     3. The passage in brackets appears in the PTS and Burmese editions, but not in the Thai
and Sri Lankan editions.
     4. This is the only point in the sutta where Ven. So˚a has the prefix “Great” (Mah›) added
to his name.
     5. This is apparently the A˛˛haka Vagga as we now have it in Sn 4.
     6. At Mv.V.13.10, the PTS version of this last line reads, “In the teaching a clean one finds
joy.” However, in the Thai, Burmese, and Sri Lankan versions of the same passage, the last line
is the same as here.



    5:7 Revata (Revata Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. Revata
the Doubter was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body
held erect, reflecting on [his] purification through the overcoming of doubt. The
Blessed One saw Ven. Revata the Doubter sitting not far away, his legs crossed,
his body held erect, reflecting on [his] purification through the overcoming of
doubt.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

               Any doubts,
        about here or the world beyond,
        about what is experienced
               by/because of others,
               by/because of oneself,1
        are abandoned—all—
               by the person in jh›na,
                       ardent,
               living the holy life.


    N O T E : 1 . This relates to the question of whether pleasure and pain are self-caused or
other-caused. As Ud 6:5 and Ud 6:6 show, this question was a hot topic in the time of the
Buddha. However, in SN 12:20, SN 12:35, and SN 12:67 the Buddha refuses to get involved in
the issue. See the discussion in Skill in Questions, chapter 8.
                                                                             87


   5:8 finanda (finanda Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near R›jagaha
at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ refuge. And on that occasion, early in the
morning of the uposatha, Ven. finanda adjusted his under robe and—carrying
his bowl & robes—went into R›jagaha for alms. Devadatta saw Ven. finanda
going for alms in R›jagaha and, on seeing him, went to him. On arrival, he said
to him, “From this day forward, friend finanda, I will conduct the uposatha &
community transactions apart from the Blessed One, apart from the community
of monks.”
    Then Ven. finanda—having gone for alms in R›jagaha, after the meal,
returning from his alms round—went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having
bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the
Blessed One, “Just now, lord, after adjusting my under robe early in the morning
and carrying my bowl & robes, I went into R›jagaha for alms. Devadatta saw me
going for alms in R›jagaha and, on seeing me, went up to me. On arrival, he said
to me, ‘From this day forward, friend finanda, I will conduct the uposatha &
community transactions apart from the Blessed One, apart from the community
of monks.’ Lord, today Devadatta will split the community. He will conduct the
uposatha & community transactions [apart from the community].”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      The good, for the good, is easy to do.
      The good, for the evil, is hard to do.
      Evil, for the evil, is easy to do.
      Evil, for the noble ones, is hard to do.



   5:9 Jeering (Sadh›yam›na Sutta)

   I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was wandering among the
Kosalans with a large community of monks. And on that occasion, a large
number of youths passed by as if jeering1 not far from the Blessed One. The
Blessed One saw the large number of youths passing by as if jeering not far
away.
   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      False pundits, totally muddled,
      speaking in the range of mere words,
      babbling as much as they like:
             led on by what,
             they don’t know.
                                                                                                88



    N O T E : 1 . Reading sadh›yam›na-rÒp› with the Burmese edition. The Thai edition reads,
sadd›yam›na-rÒp›—“as if making an uproar”—which doesn’t make much sense. The Sri
Lankan edition reads, saddh›yam›na-rÒp›—“as if showing faith”—which makes even less
sense.




    5:10 CÒ˘a Panthaka (Panthaka Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. CÒ˘a
Panthaka was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body held
erect, with mindfulness established to the fore. The Blessed One saw Ven. CÒ˘a
Panthaka sitting not far away, his legs crossed, his body held erect, with
mindfulness established to the fore.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

               With steady body,
               steady awareness,
        —whether standing, sitting, or lying down1 —
        a monk determined on mindfulness
        gains one distinction
               after another.
        Having gained one distinction
               after another,
        he goes where the King of Death
                      can’t see.


    N O T E : 1 . There’s a slight paradox in this verse in that the word for “steady” (˛hita) can
also mean “standing.” Thus when the body is steady and unmoving, it is “standing”
regardless of its posture.



        6 : Blind from Birth


    6:1 Relinquishment of the Life Force (fiyusama-osajjana Sutta)

   I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Ves›lı at
the Gabled Hall in the Great Forest. Then, early in the morning, he adjusted his
under robe and—carrying his bowl & robes—went into Ves›lı for alms. Then,
having gone for alms in Ves›lı, after the meal, returning from his alms round, he
                                                                             89


addressed Ven. finanda, “Get a sitting cloth, finanda. We will go to the P›v›la
shrine for the day’s abiding.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. finanda followed
along behind the Blessed One, carrying the sitting cloth. Then the Blessed One
went to the P›v›la shrine and, on arrival, sat down on the seat laid out.
    Seated, the Blessed One addressed Ven. finanda, “Ves›lı is refreshing,
finanda. Refreshing, too, are the Udena shrine, the Gotamaka shrine, the
Sattamba shrine, the ManySon shrine, the S›randa shrine, the P›v›la shrine.1
    “Anyone, finanda, in whom the four bases of power2 are developed,
pursued, given a means of transport, given a grounding, steadied, consolidated,
and well-undertaken, could—if he wanted—remain for an eon or the remainder
of an eon.3 In the Tath›gata, finanda, the four bases of power are developed,
pursued, given a means of transport, given a grounding, steadied, consolidated,
and well-undertaken. He could—if he wanted—remain for an eon or the
remainder of an eon.”
    But Ven. finanda—even when the Blessed One had given such a blatant sign,
such a blatant hint—wasn’t able to understand his meaning. He didn’t request of
him, “Lord, may the Blessed One remain for an eon. May the One-Well-Gone
remain for an eon—for the benefit of the many, for the happiness of the many,
out of sympathy for the world, for the welfare, benefit, & happiness of human
and divine beings.” It was as if his mind was possessed by M›ra.
    A second time… A third time, the Blessed One addressed Ven. finanda,
“Ves›lı is refreshing, finanda. Refreshing, too, are the Udena shrine, the
Gotamaka shrine, the Sattamba shrine, the ManySon shrine, the S›randa shrine,
the P›v›la shrine.
    “Anyone, finanda, in whom the four bases of power are developed, pursued,
given a means of transport, given a grounding, steadied, consolidated, and well-
undertaken, could—if he wanted—remain for an eon or the remainder of an
eon. In the Tath›gata, finanda, the four bases of power are developed, pursued,
given a means of transport, given a grounding, steadied, consolidated, and well-
undertaken. He could—if he wanted—remain for an eon or the remainder of an
eon.”
    But Ven. finanda—even when the Blessed One had given such a blatant sign,
such a blatant hint—wasn’t able to understand his meaning. He didn’t request of
him, “Lord, may the Blessed One remain for an eon. May the One-Well-Gone
remain for an eon—for the benefit of the many, for the happiness of the many,
out of sympathy for the world, for the welfare, benefit, & happiness of human
and divine beings.” It was as if his mind was possessed by M›ra.
    Then the Blessed One addressed Ven. finanda, “Go, finanda. Do what you
think it is now time to do.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. finanda got up
from his seat, bowed down to the Blessed One and—after circling him to the
right—went to sit under a tree not far from the Blessed One.
    Then, not long after Ven. finanda had left, M›ra the Evil One went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, stood to one side. As he was standing there he said
to the Blessed One, “May the Blessed One totally unbind now, lord. May the
                                                                                   90


One-Well-Gone totally unbind now, lord. Now is the time for the Blessed One’s
total unbinding, lord. After all, these words were said by the Blessed One: ‘Evil
One, I will not totally unbind as long as my monk disciples are not yet
experienced, trained, attained to confidence, desiring rest from the yoke, learned,
maintaining the Dhamma, practicing the Dhamma in line with the Dhamma,
practicing masterfully, living in line with the Dhamma; declaring the Dhamma—
after having learned it from their own teachers—teaching it, describing it, setting
it forth, revealing it, explaining it, making it plain; well-refuting, in line with the
Dhamma, any opposing teachings that have arisen; teaching the Dhamma with
its marvels.’4
     “But now, lord, the Blessed One’s monk disciples are experienced, trained,
attained to confidence, desiring rest from the yoke, learned, maintaining the
Dhamma, practicing the Dhamma in line with the Dhamma, practicing
masterfully, living in line with the Dhamma; declaring the Dhamma—after
having learned it from their own teachers—teaching it, describing it, setting it
forth, revealing it, explaining it, making it plain; well-refuting, in line with the
Dhamma, any opposing teachings that have arisen; teaching the Dhamma with
its marvels.
     “May the Blessed One totally unbind now, lord. May the One-Well-Gone
totally unbind now, lord. Now is the time for the Blessed One’s total unbinding,
lord. After all, these words were said by the Blessed One: ‘Evil One, I will not
totally unbind as long as my nun disciples… my male lay-follower disciples… my
female lay-follower disciples are not yet experienced, trained, attained to
maturity, desiring rest from the yoke, learned, maintaining the Dhamma,
practicing the Dhamma in line with the Dhamma, practicing masterfully, living in
line with the Dhamma; declaring the Dhamma—after having learned it from
their own teachers—teaching it, describing it, setting it forth, revealing it,
explaining it, making it plain; well-refuting, in line with the Dhamma, any
opposing teachings that have arisen; teaching the Dhamma with its marvels.’
     “But now, lord, the Blessed One’s female lay-follower disciples are
experienced, trained, attained to maturity, desiring rest from the yoke, learned,
maintaining the Dhamma, practicing the Dhamma in line with the Dhamma,
practicing masterfully, living in line with the Dhamma; declaring the Dhamma—
after having learned it from their own teachers—teaching it, describing it, setting
it forth, revealing it, explaining it, making it plain; well-refuting, in line with the
Dhamma, any opposing teachings that have arisen; teaching the Dhamma with
its marvels.
     “May the Blessed One totally unbind now, lord. May the One-Well-Gone
totally unbind now, lord. Now is the time for the Blessed One’s total unbinding,
lord. After all, these words were said by the Blessed One: ‘Evil One, I will not
totally unbind as long as this holy life of mine is not powerful, prosperous,
widely-spread, disseminated among many people, well-expounded as far as
there are devas & human beings.’ But now, lord, the Blessed One’s holy life is
powerful, prosperous, widely-spread, disseminated among many people, well-
expounded as far as there are devas & human beings.
                                                                                           91


    “May the Blessed One totally unbind now, lord. May the One-Well-Gone
totally unbind now, lord. Now is the time for the Blessed One’s total unbinding,
lord.”
    When this was said, the Blessed One said to M›ra, the Most Evil One: “Relax,
Evil One. It won’t be long until the Tath›gata’s total unbinding. In three month’s
time from now, the Tath›gata will totally unbind.”
    Thus at the P›v›la shrine—mindful & alert—the Blessed One relinquished the
fabrications of life.5 And as the Blessed One relinquished the fabrications of life,
there was a great earthquake, frightening & hair-raising, along with cracks of
thunder.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Comparing the incomparable6
       with coming-into-being,
       the sage relinquished
       the fabrication of becoming.
           Inwardly joyful,
           centered,
       he split his own
       coming-into-being
       like a coat of mail.7


   NO TES
    1. As DN 16 makes clear, there were several times in the past where the Buddha, at several
different locations, had commented to Ven. finanda on how refreshing it was to be in the
location where they were staying. This apparently was meant as a sign that living on would
not be a burden, for in each case he had then given a broad hint—as he does here—for Ven.
finanda to invite him to extend his life. As says in the narrative immediately following the
events portrayed in this ud›na, he would have refused the invitation if offered only twice, but
would have accepted it on the third offer. But now that he has abandoned the will to live, he
cannot take it on again, so Ven. finanda’s final opportunity to make the invitation is lost.
    2. “And what is the base of power? Whatever path, whatever practice, leads to the
attainment of power, the winning of power: That is called the base of power.
    “And what is the development of the base of power? There is the case where a monk
develops the base of power endowed with concentration founded on desire & the fabrications of
exertion. He develops the base of power endowed with concentration founded on persistence…
concentration founded on intent… concentration founded on discrimination & the fabrications
of exertion. This is called the development of the base of power.” — SN 51:26
    3. An eon, in the Buddhist cosmology, is an immensely long stretch of time. According to
the Commentary here, it can also mean the full lifespan of a human being in that particular
period of the eon (Buddhist cosmology allows for a huge fluctuation in human lifespans over
the course of an eon). The Commentary adopts this second meaning in this passage, and so
takes the Buddha’s statement here as meaning that a person who has developed the bases of
                                                                                                      92


power could live for a full lifespan or for a little bit more. In this case, the Pali for the last part of
this compound, kapp›vasesaª, would mean, “an eon plus a remainder.”
     4. DN 11 defines the miracle of instruction as instruction in training the mind to the point of
where it gains release from all suffering and stress.
     5. In other words, the Buddha relinquished the will to live longer. It was this
relinquishment that led to his total Unbinding three months later.
     6. Reading tulaª as a present participle.
     7. The image is of splitting a coat of mail with an arrow.




    6:2 Seclusion (Pa˛isalla Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Mig›ra’s mother. And on that occasion
the Blessed One, having emerged from his seclusion in the late afternoon, was
sitting outside the doorway of the porch. Then King Pasenadi Kosala went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
     Now on that occasion seven coiled-hair ascetics, seven Jain ascetics, seven
cloth-less ascetics, seven one-cloth ascetics, & seven wanderers—their nails,
armpit-hair, & body-hair grown long, carrying containers on poles [over their
shoulders]—walked past, not far from the Blessed One. King Pasenadi Kosala
saw the seven coiled-hair ascetics, seven Jain ascetics, seven cloth-less ascetics,
seven one-cloth ascetics, & seven wanderers—their nails, armpit-hair, & body-
hair grown long, carrying containers on poles [over their shoulders]—walking
past, not far from the Blessed One. On seeing them, he got up from his seat,
arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, knelt down with his right knee on
the ground, paid homage to the seven coiled-hair ascetics, seven Jain ascetics,
seven cloth-less ascetics, seven one-cloth ascetics, & seven wanderers with his
hands palm-to-palm in front his heart, and announced his name three times: “I
am the king, venerable sirs, Pasenadi Kosala. I am the king, venerable sirs,
Pasenadi Kosala. I am the king, venerable sirs, Pasenadi Kosala.”
     Then not long after the seven coiled-hair ascetics, seven Jain ascetics, seven
cloth-less ascetics, seven one-cloth ascetics, & seven wanderers had passed, King
Pasenadi Kosala went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, “Of those
in the world who are arahants or on the path to arahantship, are these among
them?”1
     “Great king, as a layman enjoying sensual pleasures; living confined with
children; using K›si fabrics & sandalwood; wearing garlands, scents, & creams;
handling gold & silver, it’s hard for you to know whether these are arahants or
on the path to arahantship.
     “It’s through living together that a person’s virtue may be known, and then
only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one
who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning.
                                                                                                  93


    “It’s through trading with a person that his purity may be known, and then
only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one
who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning.
    “It’s through adversity that a person’s endurance may be known, and then
only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one
who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning.
    “It’s through discussion that a person’s discernment may be known, and then
only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one
who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning.”
    “Amazing, lord! Astounding!—how well that was put by the Blessed One!
‘Great king, as a layman enjoying sensual pleasures; living confined with
children; using K›si fabrics & sandalwood; wearing garlands, scents, & creams;
handling gold & silver, it’s hard for you to know whether these are arahants or
on the path to arahantship.
    “‘It’s through living together that a person’s virtue may be known, and then
only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one
who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning.
    “‘It’s through trading with a person that his purity may be known, and then
only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one
who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning.
    “‘It’s through adversity that a person’s endurance may be known, and then
only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one
who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning.
    “‘It’s through discussion that a person’s discernment may be known, and
then only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by
one who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not
discerning.’
    “These men, lord, are my spies, my scouts, returning after going out through
the countryside. They go out first, and then I go. Now, when they have scrubbed
off the dirt & mud, are well-bathed & well-perfumed, have trimmed their hair
and beards, and have put on white clothes, they will go about endowed and
provided with the five strings of sensuality.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        One      should not make an effort everywhere,
                 should not be another’s hireling,
                 should not live dependent on another,
                 should not go about
                       as a trader in the Dhamma.2


    NO TES
     1. In the parallel passage at SN 3:11, King Pasenadi states this, not as a questions, but as a
fact: “Of those in the world who are arahants or on the path to arahantship, these are among
                                                                                                  94


them.” The version presented here, however, seems psychologically more probable: The king,
rather than trying to lie to the Buddha, wants to test the latter’s ability to see through the
disguise of his spies.
    2. In SN 3:11, this verse is replaced with the following:
        Not by appearance
        is a man rightly known,
        nor should trust be based
        on a quick glance,
        —for, disguised as well-restrained,
        the unrestrained go through this world.
        A counterfeit earring made of clay,
        a bronze half-dollar coated in gold:
        They go about in this world
        hidden all around:
                impure inside,
                beautiful out.
   The verse in SN 3:11 may seem more immediately relevant to the situation than the verse
given here, but the verse given here is a more interesting and original response to what is
happening.

    See also: MN 95; MN 110; AN 4:192




    6:3 It Was (Ahu Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the Blessed
One sat reflecting on the various evil, unskillful qualities that had been
abandoned [in him] and on the various skillful qualities that had gone to the
culmination of their development. Then as he realized the various evil, unskillful
qualities that had been abandoned [in him] and the various skillful qualities that
had gone to the culmination of their development, he on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Before, it was, then it wasn’t.
        Before, it wasn’t, then it was.
        It wasn’t, won’t be,
        & now isn’t to be found.1


    N O T E : 1 . The last half of this verse also appears as the last half a verse attributed to Ven.
Ka˚hadinna at Thag 2:30 (verse 180 in the PTS edition). According to the Commentary, these
lines refer to the moment of the path to arahantship, which occurs only once and is never
repeated.
                                                                                   95




   6:4 Sectarians (1) (Tittha Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion there were
many contemplatives, brahmans, & wanderers of various sects living around
S›vatthı with differing views, differing opinions, differing beliefs, dependent for
support on their differing views. Some of the contemplatives & brahmans held
this doctrine, this view: “The cosmos is eternal. Only this is true; anything
otherwise is worthless.”
     Some of the contemplatives & brahmans held this doctrine, this view: “The
cosmos is not eternal” … “The cosmos is finite” … “The cosmos is infinite” …
“The soul is the same thing as the body” … “The soul is one thing and the body
another” … “After death a Tath›gata exists” … “After death a Tath›gata does
not exist” … “After death a Tath›gata both exists & does not exist” … “After
death a Tath›gata neither exists nor does not exist. Only this is true; anything
otherwise is worthless.”
     And they kept on arguing, quarreling, & disputing, wounding one another
with weapons of the mouth, saying, “The Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that.
The Dhamma’s not like that, it’s like this.”
     Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. Having
gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms round, they
went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one
side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One, “Lord, there are
many contemplatives, brahmans, & wanderers of various sects living around
S›vatthı with differing views, differing opinions, differing beliefs, dependent for
support on their differing views.… And they keep on arguing, quarreling, &
disputing, wounding one another with weapons of the mouth, saying, ‘The
Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that. The Dhamma’s not like that, it’s like this.’”
     “Monks, the wanderers of other sects are blind & eyeless. They don’t know
what is beneficial and what is harmful. They don’t know what is the Dhamma
and what is non-Dhamma. Not knowing what is beneficial and what is harmful,
not knowing what is Dhamma and what is non-Dhamma, they keep on arguing,
quarreling, & disputing, wounding one another with weapons of the mouth,
saying, ‘The Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that. The Dhamma’s not like that,
it’s like this.’
     “Once, monks, in this same S›vatthı, there was a certain king, and the king
said to a certain man, ‘Come, my good man. Gather together all the people in
S›vatthı who have been blind from birth.’”
     “Responding, ‘As you say, your majesty,’ to the king, the man—having
rounded up all the people in S›vatthı who had been blind from birth—went to
the king and on arrival said, ‘Your majesty, the people in S›vatthı who have
been blind from birth have been gathered together.’
                                                                                     96


    “‘Very well then, I say, show the blind people an elephant.’
    “Responding, ‘As you say, your majesty,’ to the king, the man showed the
blind people an elephant. To some of the blind people he showed the elephant’s
head, saying, ‘This, blind people, is what an elephant is like.’ To some of them he
showed the elephant’s ear, saying, ‘This, blind people, is what an elephant is like.’
To some of them he showed the elephant’s tusk… the elephant’s trunk… the
elephant’s body… the elephant’s foot… the elephant’s hindquarters… the
elephant’s tail… the tuft at the end of the elephant’s tail, saying, ‘This, blind
people, is what an elephant is like.’
    “Then, having shown the blind people the elephant, the man went to the king
and on arrival said, ‘Your majesty, the blind people have seen the elephant. May
your majesty do what you think it is now time to do.’
    “Then the king went to the blind people and on arrival asked them, ‘Blind
people, have you seen the elephant?’
    “‘Yes, your majesty. We have seen the elephant.’
    “‘Now tell me, blind people, what the elephant is like.’
    “The blind people who had been shown the elephant’s head said, ‘The
elephant, your majesty, is just like a jar.’
    “Those who had been shown the elephant’s ear said, ‘The elephant, your
majesty, is just like a winnowing basket.’
    “Those who had been shown the elephant’s tusk said, ‘The elephant, your
majesty, is just like plowshare.’1
    “Those who had been shown the elephant’s trunk said, ‘The elephant, your
majesty, is just like the pole of a plow.’
    “Those who had been shown the elephant’s body said, ‘The elephant, your
majesty, is just like a granary.’
    “Those who had been shown the elephant’s foot said, ‘The elephant, your
majesty, is just like a post.’
    “Those who had been shown the elephant’s hindquarters said, ‘The elephant,
your majesty, is just like a mortar.’
    “Those who had been shown the elephant’s tail said, ‘The elephant, your
majesty, is just like a pestle.’
    “Those who had been shown the tuft at the end of the elephant’s tail said,
‘The elephant, your majesty, is just like a broom.’
    “Saying, ‘The elephant is like this, it’s not like that. The elephant’s not like
that, it’s like this,’ they struck one another with their fists. That gratified the king.
    “In the same way, monks, the wanderers of other sects are blind & eyeless.
They don’t know what is beneficial and what is harmful. They don’t know what
is the Dhamma and what is non-Dhamma. Not knowing what is beneficial and
what is harmful, not knowing what is Dhamma and what is non-Dhamma, they
keep on arguing, quarreling, & disputing, wounding one another with weapons
of the mouth, saying, ‘The Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that. The Dhamma’s
not like that, it’s like this.’”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:
                                                                                              97


       With regard to these things
       they’re attached—
       some contemplatives & brahmans.
       They quarrel & fight—
              people seeing one side.


    N O T E : 1 . Reading ph›lo with the Thai and Sri Lankan editions. According to the PTS
dictionary, this word can also mean “iron rod.” The Burmese edition reads, khılo, “post” or
“stake.” The Thai edition also includes another variant reading: sallo, “arrow.”




   6:5 Sectarians (2) (Tittha Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion there were
many contemplatives, brahmans, & wanderers of various sects living around
S›vatthı with differing views, differing opinions, differing beliefs, dependent for
support on their differing views. Some of the contemplatives & brahmans held
this doctrine, this view: “The self & the cosmos are eternal. Only this is true;
anything otherwise is worthless.”
     Some of the contemplatives & brahmans held this doctrine, this view: “The
self & the cosmos are not eternal” … “The self & the cosmos are both eternal and
not eternal” … “The self & the cosmos are neither eternal nor not eternal” …
     “The self & the cosmos are self-made” … “The self & the cosmos are other-
made” … “The self & the cosmos are both self-made & other-made” … “The self
& the cosmos—without self-making, without other-making—are spontaneously
arisen” …
      “Pleasure & pain, the self & the cosmos are self-made” … “other-made” …
“both self-made & other-made” … “Pleasure & pain, the self & the cosmos—
without self-making, without other-making—are spontaneously arisen. Only this
is true; anything otherwise is worthless.”
     And they kept on arguing, quarreling, & disputing, wounding one another
with weapons of the mouth, saying, “The Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that.
The Dhamma’s not like that, it’s like this.”
     Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. Having
gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms round, they
went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one
side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One, “Lord, there are
many contemplatives, brahmans, & wanderers of various sects living around
S›vatthı with differing views, differing opinions, differing beliefs, dependent for
support on their differing views.… And they keep on arguing, quarreling, &
disputing, wounding one another with weapons of the mouth, saying, ‘The
Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that. The Dhamma’s not like that, it’s like this.’”
                                                                                           98


     “Monks, the wanderers of other sects are blind & eyeless. They don’t know
what is beneficial and what is harmful. They don’t know what is the Dhamma
and what is non-Dhamma. Not knowing what is beneficial and what is harmful,
not knowing what is Dhamma and what is non-Dhamma, they keep on arguing,
quarreling, & disputing, wounding one another with weapons of the mouth,
saying, ‘The Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that. The Dhamma’s not like that,
it’s like this.’”
     Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       With regard to these things
       they’re attached—
       some contemplatives & brahmans.
       Not reaching the footing,1
       they sink in mid-stream.


     N O T E : 1 . This compound—tamogadhaª—is ambiguous in that it can be divided in two
ways: tam-ogadhaª, “that footing”; or tamo-gadhaª, “a footing in darkness.” The first is the
meaning apparently intended here, with “that footing” referring to the deathless (the image is
of the point, when crossing a river, where one comes close enough to the far shore that one can
touch bottom—see AN 10:58). However, the Buddha was probably conscious that the
compound could also be interpreted in the second way, which would have made the term
memorable for its shock value. There are several other passages in Pali poetry where terms
seem to have been intended to carry both positive and negative meanings for this reason. See,
for example, Dhp 97, Sn 4:10, and Sn 4:13.

   See also: DN 2; SN 12:20; SN 12:35; SN 12:67; AN 3:62



   6:6 Sectarians (3) (Tittha Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion there were
many contemplatives, brahmans, & wanderers of various sects living around
S›vatthı with differing views, differing opinions, differing beliefs, dependent for
support on their differing views. Some of the contemplatives & brahmans held
this doctrine, this view: “The self & the cosmos are eternal. Only this is true;
anything otherwise is worthless.”
    Some of the contemplatives & brahmans held this doctrine, this view: “The
self & the cosmos are not eternal” … “The self & the cosmos are both eternal and
not eternal” … “The self & the cosmos are neither eternal nor not eternal” …
    “The self & the cosmos are self-made” … “The self & the cosmos are other-
made” … “The self & the cosmos are both self-made & other-made” … “The self
                                                                                  99


& the cosmos—without self-making, without other-making—are spontaneously
arisen” …
      “Pleasure & pain, the self & the cosmos are self-made” … “other-made” …
“both self-made & other-made” … “Pleasure & pain, the self & the cosmos—
without self-making, without other-making—are spontaneously arisen. Only this
is true; anything otherwise is worthless.”
     And they kept on arguing, quarreling, & disputing, wounding one another
with weapons of the mouth, saying, “The Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that.
The Dhamma’s not like that, it’s like this.”
     Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. Having
gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms round, they
went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one
side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One, “Lord, there are
many contemplatives, brahmans, & wanderers of various sects living around
S›vatthı with differing views, differing opinions, differing beliefs, dependent for
support on their differing views.… And they keep on arguing, quarreling, &
disputing, wounding one another with weapons of the mouth, saying, ‘The
Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that. The Dhamma’s not like that, it’s like this.’”
     “Monks, the wanderers of other sects are blind & eyeless. They don’t know
what is beneficial and what is harmful. They don’t know what is the Dhamma
and what is non-Dhamma. Not knowing what is beneficial and what is harmful,
not knowing what is Dhamma and what is non-Dhamma, they keep on arguing,
quarreling, & disputing, wounding one another with weapons of the mouth,
saying, ‘The Dhamma is like this, it’s not like that. The Dhamma’s not like that,
it’s like this.’”
     Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:
       People are intent on the idea of
              ‘I-making’
       and attached to the idea of
              ‘other-making.’
       Some don’t realize this,
       nor do they see it as an arrow.
       But to one who,
       having extracted this arrow,
              sees,
       [the thought] ‘I am doing,’1 doesn’t occur;
       ‘Another is doing,’ doesn’t occur.
       This human race is possessed by conceit
                           bound by conceit,
                           tied down by conceit.
       Speaking hurtfully because of their views
       they don’t go beyond
              the wandering-on.
                                                                                                   100




    N O T E : 1. See Ud 1:1, note 3.

    See also: SN 12:20; SN 12:35; SN 12:67; AN 3:62




    6:7 SubhÒti (SubhÒti Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. SubhÒti
was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body held erect,
having attained a concentration free from directed thought. The Blessed One saw
Ven. SubhÒti sitting not far away, his legs crossed, his body held erect, having
attained a concentration free from directed thought.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        Whose thoughts are
                            vaporized,
        well-dealt-with
        within,1
        without trace—
        going beyond that tie,
        perceiving the formless,
        overcoming
        four yokes,2
        one doesn’t go
               to birth.


    NO TES
    1. This part of the verse is identical with the first half of a verse in Sn 1:1 (verse 7 in the PTS
edition).
    2. The four yokes are: sensuality, becoming, views, and ignorance. See AN 4:10.



    6:8 The Courtesan (Ga˚ika Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near R›jagaha
at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary. And on that occasion two
factions in R›jagaha were infatuated with a certain courtesan, their minds
enthralled. Arguing, quarreling, & disputing, they attacked one another with
                                                                                              101


fists, attacked one another with clods of dirt, attacked one another with sticks,
attacked one another with knives, so that they fell into death or death-like pain.
    Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. Having
gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms round, they
went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one
side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One, “At present, two
factions in R›jagaha are infatuated with a certain courtesan, their minds
enthralled. Arguing, quarreling, & disputing, they attack one another with fists,
attack one another with clods of dirt, attack one another with sticks, attack one
another with knives, so that they fall into death or death-like pain.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      What’s been attained, what’s to be attained,
      are both strewn with dust
              by one who trains
              in line with the afflicted.
Any precept & practice life whose essence is training,
and the holy life whose essence is service:
              This is one extreme.
Any who say, “There’s no harm in sensual desires”:
              This, the second extreme.
Both of these extremes cause the growth of cemeteries,
and cemeteries cause views to grow.
      Not directly knowing these two extremes,
              some fall short,
              some run too far.1
      But those who, directly knowing them,
              didn’t exist there,
              didn’t construe
              by means of them:2
      For them
      there’s no whirling through the cycle
      to be described.


    NO TES
    1. See Iti 49, and the discussion of this point in The Paradox of Becoming, chapters 2 and 6.
    2. For an example of “not existing there,” see the Buddha’s instructions to B›hiya in Ud
1:10. For an example of freeing oneself from construing, see the description of a sage at peace
near the conclusion of MN 140.
                                                                               102


   6:9 Rushing (Up›ti Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. Now on that occasion, in the pitch-
black darkness of the night, the Blessed One was sitting in the open air while oil
lamps were burning. And on that occasion, many flying insects, flying into &
around those lamps, were meeting their downfall, meeting their misfortune,
meeting their downfall & misfortune in those oil lamps. The Blessed One saw
those flying insects, flying into & around those lamps, meeting their downfall,
meeting their misfortune, meeting their downfall & misfortune in those oil
lamps.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      Rushing headlong,
      missing what’s essential,
      bringing on one new bond
             after another,
      they fall, like insects into a flame:
             those intent
             on things seen,
             things heard.



   6:10 They Appear (Uppajjanti Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. Then Ven. finanda went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he
was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, “Lord, as long as Tath›gatas—
worthy & rightly self-awakened—do not appear in the world, that’s when the
wanderers of other sects are worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and
given homage—recipients of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites
for the sick. But when Tath›gatas—worthy & rightly self-awakened—appear in
the world, that’s when the wanderers of other sects are not worshipped,
revered, honored, venerated, or given homage; nor are they recipients of robes,
alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. Now only the Blessed
One is worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given homage—a
recipient of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick—along
with the community of monks.”
    “That’s how it is, finanda. That’s how it is. As long as Tath›gatas—worthy &
rightly self-awakened—do not appear in the world, that’s when the wanderers
of other sects are worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given
homage—recipients of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the
sick. But when Tath›gatas—worthy & rightly self-awakened—appear in the
                                                                                           103


world, that’s when the wanderers of other sects are not worshipped, revered,
honored, venerated, or given homage; nor are they recipients of robes, alms
food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick. Now only the Tath›gata is
worshipped, revered, honored, venerated, and given homage—a recipient of
robes, alms food, lodgings, & medicinal requisites for the sick—along with the
community of monks.”
   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        The glowworm shines
        as long as the sun hasn’t risen.
        But when that splendor rises,
        the glowworm’s light is destroyed.
            It no longer shines.
        Likewise, sectarians1 shine
        as long as those rightly awakened
        don’t appear in the world.
        Those logicians2 aren’t purified,
        nor are their disciples.
        Those of bad views
            aren’t released
            from stress.


    NO TES
     1. Reading titthiy›naª with the Thai edition. The Sri Lankan and Burmese editions read,
takkik›naª, “logicians.” The parallel passage in the Ud›navarga (29.2) agrees with this latter
version.
     2. In DN 1, the Buddha criticizes the philosophies of many of his contemporaries for having
been “hammered out by logic.”




        7 : The Minor Section


    7:1 Bhaddiya (1) (Bhaddiya Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. At that time Ven. S›riputta was—
with a variety of approaches—instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging Ven.
Bhaddiya the Dwarf with Dhamma-talk. As Ven. Bhaddiya the Dwarf was—with
a variety of approaches—being instructed, urged, roused, & encouraged by Ven.
S›riputta with Dhamma-talk, his mind, through lack of clinging/sustenance, was
released from the effluents.
                                                                            104


   The Blessed One saw that as Ven. Bhaddiya the Dwarf was—with a variety of
approaches—being instructed, urged, roused, & encouraged by Ven. S›riputta
with Dhamma-talk, his mind, through lack of clinging/sustenance, was released
from the effluents.
   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Above, below, everywhere released,
       he doesn’t focus on “I am this.”1
       Thus released, he crosses the flood
       not crossed before,
       for the sake of no further becoming.


   N O T E : 1. See Ud 1:1, note 3.




   7:2 Bhaddiya (2) (Bhaddiya Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. At that time Ven. S›riputta was—
with a variety of approaches—instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging Ven.
Bhaddiya the Dwarf with Dhamma-talk to an even greater extent, as he thought
that Bhaddiya was still just a learner.
    The Blessed One saw that Ven. S›riputta was—with a variety of approaches—
instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging Ven. Bhaddiya the Dwarf with
Dhamma-talk to an even greater extent, as he thought that Bhaddiya was still
just a learner.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       He has cut the cycle,
       has gone away
       to freedom from longing.
       The dried-up stream
               no longer flows.
       The cycle, cut,
               no longer turns.
       This, just this,
       is the end of stress.
                                                                              105


   7:3 Attached to Sensual Pleasures (1) (K›mesu Satta Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion, most of the
people in S›vatthı were excessively attached to sensual pleasures. They lived
infatuated with, greedy for, addicted to, fastened to, absorbed in sensual
pleasures. Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their
under robes and—carrying their bowls & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms.
Having gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms
round, they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One,
“Most of the people in S›vatthı are excessively attached to sensual pleasures.
They live infatuated with, greedy for, addicted to, fastened to, absorbed in
sensual pleasures.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      Attached to sensual pleasures,
      attached to sensual ties,
      seeing no blame in the fetter,
      never will those attached to the fetter, the tie,
      cross over the flood
      so great & wide.


   7:4 Attached to Sensual Pleasures (2) (K›mesu Satta Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion, most of the
people in S›vatthı were excessively attached to sensual pleasures. They lived
infatuated with, greedy for, addicted to, fastened to, absorbed in sensual
pleasures. Then early in the morning the Blessed One adjusted his under robe
and—carrying his bowl & robes—went into S›vatthı for alms. He saw that most
of the people in S›vatthı were excessively attached to sensual pleasures, that they
live infatuated with, greedy for, addicted to, fastened to, absorbed in sensual
pleasures.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      Blinded by sensuality
      covered by the net,
      veiled with the veil of craving,
      bound by the Kinsman of the heedless,1
             like fish in the mouth of a trap,2
      they go to aging & death,
      like a milk-drinking calf to its mother.
                                                                                               106


    NO TES
    1. M›ra. There is an alliterative play here between the word “bound” (bandh›) and “by the
Kinsman” (bandhun›).
    2. This verse, up to this point, is identical with a verse attributed to Ven. R›hula in Thag 4:8
(verse 297 in the PTS edition).



    7:5 The Dwarf (Laku˚˛ha Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. Bhaddiya
the Dwarf, following behind a large number of monks, was going to the Blessed
One. From afar, the Blessed One saw Ven. Bhaddiya the Dwarf coming,
following behind a large number of monks: ugly, unsightly, stunted, treated
with condescension1 by most of the monks. On seeing him, the Blessed One
addressed the monks, “Monks, do you see that monk coming from afar,
following behind a large number of monks: ugly, unsightly, stunted, treated
with condescension by most of the monks?”
    “Yes, lord.”
    “That, monks, is a monk of great power, great might. The attainment already
attained by that monk is not of a sort easily attained. And by means of it he has
reached & remains in the supreme goal of the holy life for which clansmen
rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing & realizing it for
himself right in the here-&-now.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

           Faultless,
        canopied in white,
        the single-spoked chariot rolls along.
        See him coming, untroubled:
           one whose stream is cut,
           free from bonds.2


    NO TES
    1. The Commentary notes that misbehaving monks liked to stroke his hands and catch
hold of his ears.
    2. In SN 41:5, Citta the householder explains this verse as follows:
    “Faultless stands for virtues.
    “Canopied in white stands for release.
    “Single-spoked stands for mindfulness.
    “Rolls along stands for coming and going.
    “Chariot stands for this body composed of the four elements.…
                                                                                          107


   “Passion is a trouble; aversion is a trouble; delusion is a trouble. These have been
abandoned by a monk whose effluents have ended—their root destroyed, made like a
palmyra stump, deprived of the conditions of development, not destined for future arising.
That’s why the monk whose effluents have ended is said to be untroubled.
   “Him coming stands for the arahant.
   “Stream stands for craving. That has been abandoned by a monk whose effluents have
ended—its root destroyed, made like a palmyra stump, deprived of the conditions of
development, not destined for future arising. That’s why the monk whose effluents have
ended is said to be one whose stream is cut.
   “Passion is a bond; aversion is a bond; delusion is a bond. These have been abandoned by
a monk whose effluents have ended—their root destroyed, made like a palmyra stump,
deprived of the conditions of development, not destined for future arising. That’s why the
monk whose effluents have ended is said to be free from bonds.”
   SN 21:6 starts with the same prose passage as this ud›na but ends with a different verse:

       Swans, cranes, & peacocks,
       elephants & spotted antelope
       all fear the lion
       (though) in body there’s no comparison.
       In the same way, among human beings,
       even if one is small
       but endowed in discernment,
       one is great for that—
       not the fool endowed in physique.

   See also: SN 21:5



   7:6 The Ending of Craving (Ta˚h›khaya Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion Ven. Aññ›ta
Ko˚˜añña1 was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body
held erect, reflecting on [his] release through the total ending of craving. The
Blessed One saw Ven. Aññ›ta Ko˚˜añña sitting not far away, his legs crossed,
his body held erect, reflecting on [his] release through the total ending of
craving.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       For someone with no root, no soil, no leaves
              —how creepers?
       Who’s fit to criticize him?—
       the enlightened one freed
                     from bonds.
                                                                                          108


               Even devas praise him.
               Even by Brahm› he’s praised.


   N O T E : 1 . The Buddha’s first disciple. See SN 56:11.



   7:7 The Ending of Objectification (Papañcakhaya Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the Blessed
One was sitting, contemplating his own abandoning of the perceptions &
categories of objectification. 1
    Then the Blessed One, realizing his own abandoning of the perceptions &
categories of objectification, on that occasion exclaimed:

       One who
       has no objectifications,
          no standing-place,2
       who has gone beyond
       the tether & cross-bar:
       The world, even with its devas,
       doesn’t look down on him—
          he, going about without craving,
              a sage.


   NO TES
    1. Papañca: A mode of thought that begins with the assumption, “I am the thinker,” and
develops its categories and perceptions—about self and world, about existence and non-
existence—from there. For more on this topic, see the introduction to MN 18 and Skill in
Questions, chapters 3 and 8.
    2. On the teaching that the awakened person has no location, see The Paradox of Becoming,
chapter 7.




   7:8 Kacc›yana (Kacc›yana Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. Now at that time Ven. Mah›
Kacc›yana was sitting not far from the Blessed One, his legs crossed, his body
held erect, having mindfulness immersed in the body well-established to the fore
within. The Blessed One saw Ven. Mah› Kacc›yana sitting not far away, his legs
                                                                                       109


crossed, his body held erect, having mindfulness immersed in the body well-
established to the fore within.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       If one were to have
       mindfulness always
       established, continually
       immersed in the body,
           (thinking,)
       “It should not be,
       it should not be mine;
       it will not be,
       it will not be mine”1 —
           there,
       in that step-by-step dwelling,
           one in no long time
           would cross over
           attachment.


   N O T E : 1 . This passage can also be translated as:
           “It should not be,
           it should not occur to me;
           it will not be,
           it will not occur to me.”
   In AN 10:29, the Buddha recommends this view as conducive to developing dispassion for
becoming. However, in MN 106 he warns that it can lead to the refined equanimity of the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, which can become an object of clinging.
Only if that subtle clinging is detected can all clinging be abandoned.
   The Canon’s most extended discussion of this theme of meditation is in SN 22:55. See
Appendix Two.
   For more on this topic, see The Paradox of Becoming, chapter 5.




   7:9 The Well (Udap›na Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was wandering among the
Mallans, together with a large community of monks, and came to a brahman
village of the Mallans named ThÒna. The brahman householders of ThÒna heard
that “Gotama the Sakyan contemplative, gone forth from the Sakyan clan, is
wandering among the Mallans together with a large community of monks, and
has arrived at ThÒna.” So they filled the well all the way to the brim with grass &
                                                                                 110


chaff, [thinking], “Don’t let these shaven-headed contemplatives draw drinking
water.”
    Then the Blessed One, going down from the road, went to a certain tree, and
on arrival sat down on a seat laid out. Seated, he said to Ven. finanda: “Please,
finanda, fetch me some drinking water from that well.”
    When this was said, Ven. finanda replied, “Just now, lord, the brahman
householders of ThÒna filled that well all the way to the brim with grass & chaff,
[thinking], ‘Don’t let these shaven-headed contemplatives draw drinking
water.’”
    A second time, the Blessed One said to Ven. finanda: “Please, finanda, fetch
me some drinking water from that well.”
    A second time, Ven. finanda replied, “Just now, lord, the brahman
householders of ThÒna filled that well all the way to the brim with grass & chaff,
[thinking], ‘Don’t let these shaven-headed contemplatives draw drinking
water.’”
    A third time, the Blessed One said to Ven. finanda: “Please, finanda, fetch me
some drinking water from that well.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. finanda—taking a
bowl—went to the well. As he was approaching the well, it expelled all the grass
& chaff from its mouth and stood filled to the brim—streaming, as it were—with
pristine water, undisturbed & clear. The thought occurred to him, “How
amazing! How astounding!—the great power & great might of the Tath›gata!—
in that, while I was approaching the well, it expelled all the grass & chaff from its
mouth and stood filled to the brim—streaming, as it were—with pristine water,
undisturbed & clear.”
    Taking drinking water in his bowl, he went to the Blessed One and on arrival
said, “How amazing, lord! How astounding!—the great power & great might of
the Tath›gata!—in that, while I was approaching the well, it expelled all the grass
& chaff from its mouth and stood filled to the brim—streaming, as it were—with
pristine water, undisturbed & clear. Drink the water, O Blessed One! Drink the
water, O One-Well-Gone!”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       What need for a well
       if there were waters always?
       Having cut craving
               by the root,
       one would go about searching
               for what?
                                                                              111


   7:10 King Udena (Udena Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Kosambı
at Ghosita’s monastery. And on that occasion the inner quarters of King Udena’s
royal park had burned down, and 500 women, headed by S›m›vatı, had died.
    Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & robes—went into Kosambı for alms. Having
gone for alms in Kosambı, after the meal, returning from their alms round, they
went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one
side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One, “Lord, the inner
quarters of King Udena’s royal park have burned down, and 500 women,
headed by S›m›vatı, have died. What is the destination of those female lay
followers? What is their future course?”
    “Monks, among those female lay followers are stream-winners, once-
returners, & non-returners. All of those female lay followers, monks, died not
without [noble] fruit.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      Bound round with delusion, the world
      only appears to be competent.
      Bound with acquisitions, foolish,
      surrounded by darkness,
      it seems eternal,
             but for one who sees,
             there is nothing.



      8 : P›˛ali Village


   8:1 Unbinding (1) (Nibb›na Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the Blessed
One was instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging the monks with Dhamma-
talk concerned with unbinding. The monks—receptive, attentive, focusing their
entire awareness, lending ear—listened to the Dhamma.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      There is that dimension, monks, where there is neither earth, nor
      water, nor fire, nor wind; neither dimension of the infinitude of
      space, nor dimension of the infinitude of consciousness, nor
      dimension of nothingness, nor dimension of neither perception nor
                                                                                           112


        non-perception; neither this world, nor the next world, nor sun,
        nor moon. And there, I say, there is neither coming, nor going, nor
        staying; neither passing away nor arising: unestablished,1
        unevolving, without support [mental object].2 This, just this, is the
        end of stress.


    NO TES
    1. On unestablished consciousness, see SN 22:87 and the discussion in The Paradox of
Becoming, chapter 7.
    2. See SN 22:53.

    See also: DN 11; MN 49; SN 35:117




    8:2 Unbinding (2) (Nibb›na Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the Blessed
One was instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging the monks with Dhamma-
talk concerned with unbinding. The monks—receptive, attentive, focusing their
entire awareness, lending ear—listened to the Dhamma.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        It’s hard to see the unaffected,
        for the truth is not easily seen.
        Craving is pierced
                in one who knows;
                For one who sees,
        there is nothing.



    8:3 Unbinding (3) (Nibb›na Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the Blessed
One was instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging the monks with Dhamma-
talk concerned with unbinding. The monks—receptive, attentive, focusing their
entire awareness, lending ear—listened to the Dhamma.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:
                                                                                          113


       There is, monks, an unborn1 —unbecome—unmade—unfabricated.
       If there were not that unborn—unbecome—unmade—
       unfabricated, there would not be the case that escape from the
       born—become—made—fabricated would be discerned. But
       precisely because there is an unborn—unbecome—unmade—
       unfabricated, escape from the born—become—made—fabricated is
       discerned.2


   NO TES
    1. Some scholars have argued that the term “unborn” cannot be used to distinguish
unbinding from transmigration, as there are discourses (such as SN 15:3) stating that
transmigration itself has no beginning point, implying that it too is unborn. Thus they argue
that in this passage the term aj›taª, although a past participle, should be translated as,
“without birth.” However, this argument is based on two questionable premises. First, it
assumes that unbinding is here being contrasted with transmigration, even though the
passage simply contrasts it with the fabricated. Secondly, even assuming that the phrase “the
born—the become,” etc., is a reference to transmigration, the scholars’ argument is based on a
misreading of SN 15:3. There, transmigration is said to have an “inconceivable” or
“undiscoverable” beginning point. This is very different from saying that it is unborn. If
transmigration were unborn, it would be unfabricated (see AN 3:47), which is obviously not
the case. Thus, in translating this term to describe unbinding, I have maintained the straight
grammatical reading, “unborn.”
    2. Iti 43 gives this exclamation as the synopsis of a Dhamma talk, followed by this verse:
       The born, become, produced,
       made, fabricated, impermanent,
       fabricated of aging & death,
       a nest of illnesses, perishing,
       come-into-being through nourishment
       and the guide [that is craving]—
                is unfit for delight.
       The escape from that
                is
       calm, permanent,
       a sphere beyond conjecture,
       unborn, unproduced,
       the sorrowless, stainless state,
       the cessation of stressful qualities,
       stilling-of-fabrications bliss.
                                                                                         114


   8:4 Unbinding (4) (Nibb›na Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. And on that occasion the Blessed
One was instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging the monks with Dhamma-
talk concerned with unbinding. The monks—receptive, attentive, focusing their
entire awareness, lending ear—listened to the Dhamma.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       One who is dependent has wavering. One who is independent has
       no wavering. There being no wavering, there is calm. There being
       calm, there is no yearning. There being no yearning, there is no
       coming or going. There being no coming or going, there is no
       passing away or arising. There being no passing away or arising,
       there is neither a here nor a there nor a between-the-two. This, just
       this, is the end of stress.1


   N O T E : 1 . In MN 144 and SN 35:87, Ven. Cunda quotes this passage as a teaching of the
Buddha and tells Ven. Channa to keep it firmly in mind.

   See also: MN 140; SN 22:53




   8:5 Cunda (Cunda Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion, while the Blessed One was wandering
among the Mallans with a large community of monks, he arrived at P›v›. There
he stayed near P›v› in the mango grove of Cunda the silversmith.
    Cunda the silversmith heard, “The Blessed One, they say, while wandering
among the Mallans with a large community of monks and reaching P›v›, is
staying near P›v› in my mango grove.”
    So Cunda went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One instructed, urged,
roused, & encouraged him with Dhamma-talk. Then Cunda—instructed, urged,
roused, & encouraged by the Blessed One’s Dhamma-talk—said to him, “Lord,
may the Blessed One acquiesce to my meal tomorrow, together with the
community of monks.”
    The Blessed One acquiesced with silence.
    Then Cunda, understanding the Blessed One’s acquiescence, got up from his
seat, bowed down to the Blessed One, and left, circling him to the right. Then, at
the end of the night, after having exquisite staple & non-staple food—including a
large amount of pig-delicacy1 —prepared in his own home, he announced the
time to the Blessed One: “It’s time, lord. The meal is ready.”
                                                                              115


    Then the Blessed One, early in the morning, adjusted his under robe and—
carrying his bowl & robes—went together with the community of monks to
Cunda’s home. On arrival, he sat down on the seat laid out. Seated, he said to
Cunda, “Cunda, serve me with the pig-delicacy you have had prepared, and the
community of monks with the other staple & non-staple food you have had
prepared.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Cunda served the
Blessed One with the pig-delicacy he had had prepared, and the community of
monks with the other staple & non-staple food he had had prepared. Then the
Blessed One said to him, “Cunda, bury the remaining pig-delicacy in a pit. I don’t
see anyone in the world—together with its devas, M›ras, & Brahmas, with its
people with their contemplatives & brahmans, their royalty & commonfolk—in
whom, when it was ingested, it would go to a healthy change, aside from the
Tath›gata.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Cunda buried the
remaining pig-delicacy in a pit, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, after
bowing down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there, the Blessed One—
after instructing, urging, rousing, & encouraging him with Dhamma-talk—got
up from his seat and left.
    Then in the Blessed One, after he had eaten Cunda’s meal, there arose a
severe illness accompanied with (the passing of) blood, with intense pains &
deadly. But the Blessed One endured it—mindful, alert, & not struck down by it.
    Then he addressed Ven. finanda, “finanda, we will go to Kusinar›.”
    “As you say, lord,” Ven. finanda responded to the Blessed One.
      I have heard that,
      on eating Cunda the silversmith’s meal,
      the enlightened one was touched by illness—
          fierce, deadly.
      After he had eaten the pig-delicacy,
      a fierce sickness arose in the Teacher.
      After being purged of it,
      the Blessed One said,
      “To the city of Kusinar›
      I will go.”2
    Then the Blessed One, going down from the road, went to a certain tree and,
on arrival, said to Ven. finanda, “finanda, please arrange my outer robe folded
in four. I am tired. I will sit down.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. finanda arranged
the outer robe folded in four. The Blessed One sat down on the seat laid out.
Seated, he said to Ven. finanda, “finanda, please fetch me some water. I am
thirsty. I will drink.”
    When this was said, Ven. finanda said to the Blessed One, “Lord, just now 500
carts have passed through. The meager river—cut by the wheels—flows turbid
& disturbed. But the Kuku˛a river is not far away, with pristine water, pleasing
                                                                             116


water, cool water, pellucid water,3 with restful banks, refreshing. There the
Blessed One will drink potable water and cool his limbs.”
    A second time, the Blessed One said to Ven. finanda, “finanda, please fetch
me some water. I am thirsty. I will drink.”
    A second time, Ven. finanda said to the Blessed One, “Lord, just now 500
carts have passed through. The meager water—cut by the wheels—flows turbid
& disturbed. But the Kuku˛a River is not far away, with pristine water, pleasing
water, cool water, pellucid water, with restful banks, refreshing. There the
Blessed One will drink potable water and cool his limbs.”
    A third time, the Blessed One said to Ven. finanda, “finanda, please fetch me
some water. I am thirsty. I will drink.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. finanda—taking a
bowl—went to the river. And the meager river that, cut by the wheels, had been
flowing turbid & disturbed, on his approach flowed pristine, clear, &
undisturbed. The thought occurred to him, “How amazing! How astounding!—
the great power & great might of the Tath›gata!—in that this meager river that,
cut by the wheels, was flowing turbid & disturbed, on my approach flowed
pristine, clear, & undisturbed!” Fetching water with the bowl, he went to the
Blessed One and on arrival said, “How amazing! How astounding!—the great
power & great might of the Tath›gata!—in that this meager river that, cut by the
wheels, was flowing turbid & disturbed, on my approach flowed pristine, clear,
& undisturbed! Drink the water, O Blessed One! Drink the water, O One-Well-
Gone!”
    Then the Blessed One drank the water.4
    Then the Blessed One, together with the community of monks, went to the
Kuku˛a River and, after arriving at the Kuku˛a River, going down, bathing,
drinking, & coming back out, went to a mango grove. On arrival, the Blessed
One said to Ven. Cundaka, “Cundaka, please arrange my outer robe folded in
four. I am tired. I will lie down.”
    Responding, “As you say, lord,” to the Blessed One, Ven. Cundaka arranged
the outer robe folded in four. The Blessed One, lying on his right side, took up
the lion’s posture, placing one foot on top of the other—mindful, alert, and
attending to the perception of getting up. Ven. Cundaka sat in front of him.
             The awakened one,
      —having gone to the little Kuku˛a river
      with its pristine, pleasing water, clear—
             the Teacher, seeming very tired,
             the Tath›gata, unequalled in the world
      went down, bathed, drank, & came out.
             Honored, surrounded,
      in the midst of the group of monks,
             the Blessed One, Teacher,
      proceeding here in the Dhamma,
             the great seer,
      went to the mango grove.
                                                                              117


      He addressed the monk named Cundaka,
            “Spread it out, folded in four
            for me to lie down.”
      Ordered by the One of developed mind,
      Cundaka quickly set it out, folded in four.
      The Teacher lay down, seeming very tired,
      and Cundaka sat down there before him.
    Then the Blessed One addressed Ven. finanda, “finanda, if anyone tries to
incite remorse in Cunda the silversmith, saying, ‘It’s no gain for you, friend
Cunda, it’s ill-done by you, that the Tath›gata, having eaten your last alms, was
totally unbound,’ then Cunda’s remorse should be allayed (in this way): ‘It’s a
gain for you, friend Cunda, it’s well-done by you, that the Tath›gata, having
eaten your last alms, was totally unbound. Face to face with the Blessed One
have I heard it, face to face have I learned it, “These two alms are equal to each
other in fruit, equal to each other in result, of much greater fruit & reward than
any other alms. Which two? The alms that, after having eaten it, the Tath›gata
awakens to the unexcelled right self-awakening. And the alms that, after having
eaten it, the Tath›gata is unbound by means of the unbinding property with no
fuel remaining.5 These are the two alms that are equal to each other in fruit,
equal to each other in result, of much greater fruit & reward than any other
alms. Venerable6 Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to
long life. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to
beauty. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to
happiness. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads
to heaven. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads
to rank. Venerable Cunda the silversmith has accumulated kamma that leads to
sovereignty.”’ In this way, finanda, Cunda the silversmith’s remorse should be
allayed.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

      For a person giving,
         merit increases.
      For one self-restraining,
         no animosity is amassed.
      One who is skillful
             leaves evil behind
                     and
      —from the ending of passion,
                              aversion,
                              delusion—
         is totally unbound.
                                                                                                 118


    NO TES
    1. The Commentary notes a wide range of opinions on what “pig-delicacy” means. The
opinion given in the Mah› A˛˛hakath›—the primary source for the Commentary we now
have—is that pig-delicacy is tender pork. Other opinions include soft bamboo shoots or
mushrooms that pigs like to nibble on, or a special elixir. Given that India has long had a
history of giving fanciful names to its foods and elixirs, it’s hard to say for sure what the
Buddha ate for his last meal.
    2. This style of narrative—in which prose passages alternate with verses retelling parts of
what was narrated in the prose—is called a campÒ. This sutta is one of the few instances of this
type of narrative in the Pali Canon. Another is the Ku˚›la J›taka (J 5:416-456). There are also
some Vedic examples of this form in the Br›hma˚as, texts that apparently dated from around
the same time as the Pali Canon. When the incidents portrayed in this sutta were included in
DN 16, these alternating narrative verses were included. Aside from the Buddha’s
conversation with Pukkusa the Mallan (see note 4), these are the only incidents that DN 16
narrates in this style. This suggests that perhaps the version of the narrative given here was
composed first as a separate piece and then later was incorporated into DN 16.
    3. Ven. finanda’s description of the water is alliterative in the Pali: s›todak› sıtodak› setodak›.
    4. At this point in the narrative, DN 16 inserts the account of the Buddha’s encounter with
Pukkusa the Mallan. There’s no way of knowing which version of the events is earlier, as the
focus of this sutta is not on telling everything that happened to the Buddha on his final day, but
on recounting all the events related to Cunda’s meal.
    5. Unbinding as experienced by an arahant at death. The image is of a fire so thoroughly
out that the embers are totally cold. This is distinguished from the unbinding property with
fuel remaining—unbinding as experienced in this lifetime—which is like a fire that has gone
out but whose embers are still glowing. See Iti 44, Thag 15:2, and the discussion in The Mind
Like Fire Unbound, chapter 1.
    6. fiyasmant: This is a term of respect usually reserved for senior monks. The Buddha’s
using it here was probably meant to emphasize the point that Cunda’s gift of the Buddha’s last
meal should be treated as a very honorable thing.

    See also: AN 10:176; Sn 1:5




    8:6 P›˛ali Village (P›˛alig›ma Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion, while the Blessed One was wandering
among the Magadhans with a large community of monks, he arrived at P›˛ali
Village. The lay followers of P›˛ali Village heard, “The Blessed One, they say,
while wandering among the Magadhans with a large community of monks, has
reached P›˛ali Village.” So they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having
bowed down to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said to him,
“Lord, may the Blessed One acquiesce to (the use of) the rest-house hall.”
    The Blessed One acquiesced with silence. Sensing his acquiescence, the lay
followers of P›˛ali Village got up from their seats, bowed down to him, circled
                                                                               119


him to the right, and then went to the rest-house hall. On arrival, they spread it
all over with felt rugs, arranged seats, set out a water vessel, and raised an oil
lamp. Then they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down,
stood to one side. As they were standing there they said to him, “Lord, the rest-
house hall has been covered all over with felt rugs, seats have been arranged, a
water vessel has been set out, and an oil lamp raised. May the Blessed One do
what you think it is now time to do.”
    So the Blessed One, adjusting his under robe and—carrying his bowl &
robes1 —went together with a community of monks to the rest-house hall. On
arrival he washed his feet, entered the hall, and sat with his back to the central
post, facing east. The community of monks washed their feet, entered the hall,
and sat with their backs to the western wall, facing east, ranged around the
Blessed One.
    The lay followers of P›˛ali Village washed their feet, entered the hall, and sat
with their backs to the eastern wall, facing west, ranged around the Blessed One.
    Then the Blessed One addressed the lay followers of P›˛ali Village,
“Householders, there are these five drawbacks coming from an unvirtuous
person’s failure in virtue. Which five?
    “There is the case where an unvirtuous person, by reason of heedlessness,
undergoes the loss/confiscation of great wealth. This is the first drawback
coming from an unvirtuous person’s failure in virtue.
    “Furthermore, the bad reputation of the unvirtuous person, failing in virtue,
gets spread about. This is the second drawback coming from an unvirtuous
person’s failure in virtue.
    “Furthermore, whatever assembly the unvirtuous person, failing in virtue,
approaches—whether of noble warriors, brahmans, householders, or
contemplatives—he/she does so without confidence & abashed. This is the third
drawback coming from an unvirtuous person’s failure in virtue.
    “Furthermore, the unvirtuous person, failing in virtue, dies confused. This is
the fourth drawback coming from an unvirtuous person’s failure in virtue.
    “Furthermore, the unvirtuous person, failing in virtue—on the break-up of
the body, after death—reappears in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a
lower realm, a hell. This is the fifth drawback coming from an unvirtuous
person’s failure in virtue.
    “These, householders, are the five drawbacks coming from an unvirtuous
person’s failure in virtue.
    “Householders, there are these five rewards coming from a virtuous person’s
consummation in virtue. Which five?
    “There is the case where a virtuous person, by reason of heedfulness,
acquires a great mass of wealth. This is the first reward coming from a virtuous
person’s consummation in virtue.
    “Furthermore, the fine reputation of the virtuous person, consummate in
virtue, gets spread about. This is the second reward coming from a virtuous
person’s consummation in virtue.
     “Furthermore, whatever assembly the virtuous person, consummate in
virtue, approaches—whether of noble warriors, brahmans, householders, or
                                                                                120


contemplatives—he/she does so with confidence & unabashed. This is the third
reward coming from a virtuous person’s consummation in virtue.
      “Furthermore, the virtuous person, consummate in virtue, dies unconfused.
This is the fourth reward coming from a virtuous person’s consummation in
virtue.
      “Furthermore, the virtuous person, consummate in virtue—on the break-up
of the body, after death—reappears in a good destination, a heavenly world.
This is the fifth reward coming from a virtuous person’s consummation in virtue.
      “These, householders, are the five rewards coming from a virtuous person’s
consummation in virtue.”
     Then the Blessed One—having instructed, urged, roused, & encouraged the
lay followers of P›˛ali Village for a large part of the night with Dhamma-talk—
dismissed them, saying, “The night is far gone, householders. Do what you think
it is now time to do.”
     So the lay followers of P›˛ali Village, delighting in & approving of the Blessed
One’s words, got up from their seats, bowed down to him, and left, circling him
to the right. Then the Blessed One, not long after they had left, entered an empty
building.
     Now, on that occasion, Sunıdha & Vassak›ra, the chief ministers of Magadha,
were building a city at P›˛ali Village to preempt the Vajjians. And on that
occasion many devas by the thousands were occupying sites in P›˛ali Village. In
the area where devas of great influence occupied sites, there the minds of the
king’s royal ministers of great influence were inclined to build their homes. In
the area where devas of middling influence occupied sites, there the minds of the
king’s royal ministers of middling influence were inclined to build their homes.
In the area where devas of low influence occupied sites, there the minds of the
king’s royal ministers of low influence were inclined to build their homes.
     The Blessed One, with the divine eye—purified and surpassing the human—
saw many devas by the thousands occupying sites in P›˛ali Village. In the area
where devas of great influence occupied sites, there the minds of the king’s royal
ministers of great influence were inclined to build their homes. In the area where
devas of middling influence occupied sites, there the minds of the king’s royal
ministers of middling influence were inclined to build their homes. In the area
where devas of low influence occupied sites, there the minds of the king’s royal
ministers of low influence were inclined to build their homes.
     Then, getting up in the last watch of the night, the Blessed One addressed
Ven. finanda, “finanda, who is building a city at P›˛ali Village?”
     “Sunıdha & Vassak›ra, the chief ministers of Magadha, lord, are building a
city at P›˛ali Village to preempt the Vajjians.”
     “finanda, it’s as if they had consulted the devas of the Thirty-three: That’s
how Sunıdha & Vassak›ra, the chief ministers of Magadha, are building a city at
P›˛ali Village to preempt the Vajjians.
     “Just now, finanda—with the divine eye—purified and surpassing the
human—I saw many devas by the thousands occupying sites in P›˛ali Village. In
the area where devas of great influence occupy sites, there the minds of the
king’s royal ministers of great influence are inclined to build their homes. In the
                                                                               121


area where devas of middling influence occupy sites, there the minds of the
king’s royal ministers of middling influence are inclined to build their homes. In
the area where devas of low influence occupy sites, there the minds of the king’s
royal ministers of low influence are inclined to build their homes.
    “finanda, as far as the sphere of the Ariyans extends, as far as merchants’
roads extend, this will be the supreme city: P›˛aliputta,2 where the seedpods of
the P›˛ali plant break open. There will be three dangers for P›˛aliputta: from fire,
from water, and from the breaking of alliances.”
    Then Sunıdha & Vassak›ra, the chief ministers of Magadha, went to the
Blessed One and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After an
exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, they stood to one side. As they were
standing there, they said to him, “May Master Gotama acquiesce to our meal
today, together with the community of monks.” The Blessed One acquiesced
with silence.
    Then Sunıdha & Vassak›ra, the chief ministers of Magadha, understanding
the Blessed One’s acquiescence, went to their rest-house. On arrival, after having
exquisite staple & non-staple food prepared in their rest-house, they announced
the time to the Blessed One: “It’s time, Master Gotama. The meal is ready.”
    Then the Blessed One, early in the morning, adjusted his under robe and—
carrying his bowl & robes—went together with the community of monks to the
rest-house of Sunıdha & Vassak›ra, the chief ministers of Magadha. On arrival,
he sat down on the seat laid out. Sunıdha & Vassak›ra, with their own hands,
served & satisfied the community of monks, with the Buddha at its head, with
exquisite staple & non-staple food. Then, when the Blessed One had finished his
meal and withdrawn his hand from the bowl, Sunıdha & Vassak›ra, taking a low
seat, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, the Blessed One gave his
approval with these verses:
       In whatever place
       a wise person makes his dwelling,
              —there providing food
          for the virtuous,
              the restrained,
              leaders of the holy life—
       he should dedicate that offering
          to the devas there.
       They, receiving honor, will honor him;
       being respected, will show him respect.
       As a result, they will feel sympathy for him,
              like that of a mother for her child, her son.
       A person with whom the devas sympathize
              always meets with auspicious things.
   Then the Blessed One, having given his approval to Sunıdha & Vassak›ra
with these verses, got up from his seat and left. And on that occasion, Sunıdha &
Vassak›ra followed right after the Blessed One, (thinking,) “By whichever gate
Gotama the contemplative departs today, that will be called the Gotama Gate.
                                                                                          122


And by whichever ford he crosses over the Ganges River, that will be called the
Gotama Ford.”
    So the gate by which the Blessed One departed was called the Gotama Gate.
Then he went to the Ganges River. Now on that occasion the Ganges River was
full up to the banks, so that a crow could drink from it. Some people were
searching for boats, some were searching for floats, some were binding rafts in
hopes of going from this shore to the other. So the Blessed One—just as a strong
man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm—disappeared from
the near bank of the Ganges River and reappeared on the far bank together with
the community of monks. He saw that some people were searching for boats,
some were searching for floats, some were binding rafts in hopes of going from
this shore to the other.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Those
       who cross the foaming flood,
       having made a bridge, avoiding the swamps
             —while people are binding rafts—
       have already crossed
             : the wise.


   NO TES
    1. The translation here follows the Burmese and Sri Lankan editions of the text. The PTS
and Thai editions state that the Buddha went to the rest-house hall in the morning—which,
given the events that follow, doesn’t seem right, for he would have spent the entire day
teaching the lay followers of P›˛ali Village. The Burmese and Sri Lankan editions of the
account of these events given in DN 16 state explicitly that the Buddha went to the rest-house
hall in the late afternoon, which seems more reasonable. The PTS edition of that passage
doesn’t state the time of day, while the Thai edition states that he went in the morning.
    2. P›˛aliputta later became the capital of King Asoka’s empire. The “breaking open of the
seed-pods (pÒ˛a-bhedana)” is a wordplay on the last part of the city’s name.
    Archeological evidence from what may have been part of Asoka’s palace in P›˛aliputta
shows burnt wooden posts buried in mud—perhaps a sign that the palace burned and then
was buried in a flood.

   See also: MN 108; AN 4:183




   8:7 A Fork in the Path (Dvidhapatha Sutta)

   I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was journeying along a
road in the Kosalan country with Ven. N›gasam›la as his junior companion.
                                                                                                  123


Ven. N›gasam›la, while going along the road, saw a fork in the path. On seeing
it, he said to the Blessed One, “That, lord Blessed One,1 is the route. We go that
way.” When this was said, the Blessed One said, “This, N›gasam›la, is the route.
We go this way.”
     A second time… A third time, Ven. N›gasam›la said to the Blessed One,
“That, lord Blessed One, is the route. We go that way.” And for a third time, the
Blessed One said, “This, N›gasam›la, is the route. We go this way.”
     Then Ven. N›gasam›la, placing the Blessed One’s bowl & robes right there
on the ground, left, saying, “This, lord Blessed One, is the bowl & robes.”
     Then as Ven. N›gasam›la was going along that route, thieves—jumping out
in the middle of the road—pummeled him with their fists & feet, broke his bowl,
and ripped his outer robe to shreds.
     So Ven. N›gasam›la—with his bowl broken, his outer robe ripped to
shreds—went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, bowed down to him and sat to
one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, “Just now, lord, as I
was going along that route, thieves jumped out in the middle of the road,
pummeled me with their fists & feet, broke my bowl, and ripped my outer robe
to shreds.”
     Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        When traveling together,
        mixed together
        with a person who doesn’t know,
        an attainer-of-wisdom,
        on realizing that the person is evil,
            abandons him
        as a milk-feeding2 heron,
            a bog.


    NO TES
    1. Throughout the first part of this story, Ven. N›gasam›la refers to the Buddha with this
exaggerated form of address. Perhaps the compilers meant this as a linguistic hint of how
inappropriate an attendant he was for the Buddha. (Suppav›s› uses it in Ud 2:8, but there it is
appropriate as she is overcome with joy.) At the point in the present narrative where Ven.
N›gasam›la puts the Buddha’s bowl and robes on the ground, the Sri Lankan and Burmese
editions correct his statement to the more appropriate: “This, lord, is the Blessed One’s bowl &
robes.” However, to be in keeping with his normal way of addressing the Buddha, and to
stress the rudeness of the gesture, I felt it better to keep the sentence as it is in the Thai edition.
Only after Ven. N›gasam›la is chastened by his experience with the thieves does he revert to
the using the simpler and more standard address: “lord.”
    2. Milk-feeding = khırapaka. This is a poetic way of saying “young and unweaned”—the
“milk” here being the regurgitated food with which the mother heron feeds her young.
Also—in the conventions of Indian literature—the reference to milk suggests that the heron is
                                                                                            124


white. The Commentary has a fanciful way of explaining this term, saying that it refers to a
special type of heron so sensitive that, when fed milk mixed with water, it drinks just the milk.



    8:8 Vis›kh› (Vis›kh› Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Mig›ra’s mother. And on that occasion a
dear and beloved grandson of Vis›kh›, Mig›ra’s mother, had died. So Vis›kh›,
Mig›ra’s mother—her clothes wet, her hair wet—went to the Blessed One in the
middle of the day and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As
she was sitting there the Blessed One said to her: “Why have you come here,
Vis›kh›—your clothes wet, your hair wet—in the middle of the day?”
    When this was said, she said to the Blessed One, “My dear and beloved
grandson has died. This is why I have come here—my clothes wet, my hair
wet—in the middle of the day.”
    “Vis›kh›, would you like to have as many children & grandchildren as there
are people in S›vatthı?”
    “Yes, lord, I would like to have as many children & grandchildren as there are
people in S›vatthı.”
    “But how many people in S›vatthı die in the course of a day?”
    “Sometimes ten people die in S›vatthı in the course of a day, sometimes
nine… eight… seven… six… five… four… three… two… Sometimes one person
dies in S›vatthı in the course of a day. S›vatthı is never free from people dying.”
    “So what do you think, Vis›kh›? Would you ever be free of wet clothes &
wet hair?”
    “No, lord. Enough of my having so many children & grandchildren.”
    “Vis›kh›, those who have a hundred dear ones have a hundred sufferings.
Those who have ninety dear ones have ninety sufferings. Those who have
eighty… seventy… sixty… fifty… forty… thirty… twenty… ten… nine… eight…
seven… six… five… four… three… two… Those who have one dear one have
one suffering. Those who have no dear ones have no sufferings. They are free
from sorrow, free from stain, free from lamentation, I tell you.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

        The sorrows, lamentations,
        the many kinds of suffering in the world,
        exist dependent on something dear.
               They don’t exist
               when there’s nothing dear.
        And thus blissful & sorrowless
        are those for whom nothing
        in the world is anywhere dear.
        So one who aspires
                                                                                         125


       to the stainless & sorrowless
       shouldn’t make anything
              dear
       in the world
              anywhere.

   See also: MN 87; Thig 3:5; Thig 6:1




   8:9 Dabba (1) (Dabba Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. Then Ven. Dabba Mallaputta went
to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, “Now is the time for my total
unbinding, O One-Well-Gone!”
    “Then do, Dabba, what you think it is now time to do.”
    Then Ven. Dabba Mallaputta, rising from his seat, bowed down to the Blessed
One and, circling him on the right, rose up into the air and sat cross-legged in the
sky, in space. Entering & emerging from the fire property, he was totally
unbound. Now, when Dabba Mallaputta rose up into the air and, sitting cross-
legged in the sky, in space, entered & emerged from the fire property and was
totally unbound, his body burned and was consumed so that neither ashes nor
soot could be discerned. Just as when ghee or oil is burned and consumed,
neither ashes nor soot can be discerned, in the same way, when Dabba
Mallaputta rose up into the air and, sitting cross-legged in the sky, in space,
entered & emerged from the fire property and was totally unbound, his body
burned and was consumed so that neither ashes nor soot could be discerned.
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       The body broke up,
       perception ceased,
       feelings went cold1
              —all2 —
       fabrications were stilled,
              consciousness
              has come to an end.


   NO TES
    1 . Following the reading vedan› sıtibhaviªsu from the Burmese and Sri Lankan editions. In
support of this reading, see MN 140 and Iti 44. The Thai edition reads, vedan›-pıti-dahaªsu:
feeling & rapture were burned away.
                                                                                         126

    2. The word “all” here functions as a lamp, modifying both “feelings” and “fabrications.”
See Ud 1:3, note 1.


   See also: DN 11



   8:10 Dabba (2) (Dabba Sutta)

     I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near S›vatthı
at Jeta’s Grove, An›thapi˚˜ika’s monastery. There he addressed the monks,
“Monks!”
     “Yes, lord,” the monks responded to him.
     The Blessed One said, “When Dabba Mallaputta rose up into the air and,
sitting cross-legged in the sky, in space, entered & emerged from the fire
property and was totally unbound, his body burned and was consumed so that
neither ashes nor soot could be discerned. Just as when ghee or oil is burned and
consumed, neither ashes nor soot can be discerned, in the same way, when
Dabba Mallaputta rose up into the air and, sitting cross-legged in the sky, in
space, entered & emerged from the fire property and was totally unbound, his
body burned and was consumed so that neither ashes nor soot could be
discerned.”
     Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
exclaimed:

       Just as the destination of a glowing fire
               struck with a [blacksmith’s] iron hammer,
               gradually growing calm,
                      isn’t known:1
       Even so, there’s no destination to describe
             for those rightly released
                    —having crossed over the flood
                            of sensuality’s bond—
             for those who’ve attained
                       unwavering bliss.


    N O T E : 1 . For a discussion of the ancient Buddhist view of what happened to an
extinguished fire, see The Mind Like Fire Unbound, Chapters 1 and 2.

   See also: MN 72; SN 6:15; SN 22:86; AN 4:173; Thig 5:10
                                                                                 127


                                  Appendices

A PPEND IX O NE

   On the history of the Ud›na

    Passages in the Canon mention ud›nas in a list of nine genres in which the
Buddha’s teachings and events in his life were memorized during his lifetime.
There has been some speculation as to whether the Ud›na we currently have is
in any way related to the ud›nas mentioned in the list. The general consensus is
that most of the exclamations at the end of our current ud›nas might possibly
date from the Buddha’s time, but that the stories are obviously a much later
invention. There is, however, no proof for either position.
    The question of how to prove through textual analysis whether the
exclamations actually came from the Buddha is essentially uninteresting: There is
no historical evidence to prove or disprove that anything in the Canon came
from the Buddha; the only way to test the value of what the Canon contains is to
put its teachings to the test.
    It is interesting, however, to examine the arguments for assigning a late date
to the stories in the Ud›nas, for when we examine these arguments we find that
they teach us more about the assumptions of the people who present them than
about the Ud›na itself.
    The arguments fall into two main classes: those based on the form of the text,
and those on the content.
    The first formal argument for the lateness of the stories is based on the fact
that a fraction of the exclamations occur elsewhere in the major poetry
anthologies of the Canon without any connection to the stories in the Ud›na. I
have noted some of these parallels in the notes. Here they are as a list:
       1:9 (last half) = Dhp 393 (last half)
       2:3 = Dhp 131-132
       3:4 = Thag 14:1 (PTS v. 651); Thag 17:2 (PTS v. 1000)
       3:6 (first part) = Sn 3:4 (PTS v. 469) (first part)
       4:3 = Dhp 42
       4:4 = near equivalent, Thag 2:36 (PTS vv. 191–192)
       4:6 = Dhp 185
       4:7 = Thag 1:68
       4:9 = Sn 3:12 (PTS v. 746)
       5:5 = Thag 6:13 (PTS v. 447)
       6:3 (last half) = Thag 2:30 (PTS v. 180 – last half)
       6:7 (first half) = Sn 1:1 (PTS v. 7 – last half)
       7:4 (first part) = Thag 4:8 (PTS v. 297)
    In addition to these parallels in the Pali Canon, variants of all the exclamations
also appear, again without stories, in the Ud›navarga, a compilation of verses in
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit made by a Sarv›stiv›din monk, Dharmatr›ta,
                                                                              128


somewhere between 75 B.C.E and 200 C.E. From these facts the argument
maintains that because these verses occur without a story in some places, but
with a story in the Ud›na, the stories must be later additions.
    The problem with this argument is that it ignores the possibility that the
compilers of the other texts might have had a different purpose than the
compilers of the Ud›na. They could have simply been interested in creating
anthologies of verses shorn of any narrative frameworks. What’s ironic is that
this latter point is sometimes used to “prove” the lateness of the Dhammapada
as a collection: Some of the Dhammapada verses occur associated with stories in
other parts of the Pali Canon, and scholars have argued that the compilers of the
Dhammapada simply lifted the verses from those passages and dropped the
stories.
    Because this argument can be used either way—to prove that collections of
verses with stories are later than collections of verses without stories, and that
collections of verses without stories are later than collections of verses with
stories—it doesn’t really prove either position.
    A second set of arguments for the lateness of the Ud›na is based on the fact
that thirteen of the ud›nas—story and verse—also occur elsewhere in the
Canon:
      1:1 — Mv.I.1.1–3 (different details in the story)
      1:2 — Mv.I.1.4–5 (different details in the story)
      1:3 — Mv.I.1.6.7
      1:4 — Mv.I.2
      2:1 — Mv.I.3
      2:10 — Cv.VII.1.5–6
      4:5 — Mv.X.3–4 (different details in the story)
      5:5 — Cv.IX.1, AN 8:20 (no verse)
      5:6 — Mv.V.13.1–10 (different details in the story; the verse is also
          different in the PTS but not in the Thai, Sri Lankan, or Burmese
          editions)
      5:8 — Cv.VII.3.17
      6:1 — DN 16, SN 51:10, AN 8:77
      8:5 — DN 16 (includes an intervening incident not narrated in 8:5)
      8:6 — Mv.VI.28, DN 16
   What’s notable about these parallels is that seven of the thirteen occur in the
two longest biographical accounts in the Canon: the account of the events
leading from the Buddha’s awakening to his gaining his two foremost disciples in
Mv.I; and the account of his last year in DN 16. From this fact, scholars have
argued that these ud›nas were simply lifted from these longer accounts. Because
DN 16 is regarded as a late document, this would mean that the compilation of
the Ud›na was even later. Sometimes this argument is bolstered with another
one: that originally the monks compiled a continuous narrative of the events in
the Buddha’s life, but for some reason the narrative was chopped up into the bits
and pieces we now find in the early canons, whereas the narrative as a whole
was forgotten or lost.
                                                                               129


    This latter argument, of course, is purely conjectural, based largely on the
assumption that the early monks would have had a modern Western desire for a
complete biography of their teacher. And it begs the question, why would the
monks have thrown away a perfectly good continuous narrative if they had had
one?
    As for the preceding argument, it is belied by two facts. The first is that the
longer narratives containing parallels to the ud›nas lack a sense of flow. If
anything, they read as if they were stitched together from preexisting materials,
the ud›nas being among them. Second, one of the ud›nas with a parallel in DN
16—8:5—is composed in a style called campÒ, in which the narrative is told in
both prose and verse. This style is rarely used in the Canon. If it was originally
part of DN 16 before being chopped off into an ud›na, we would reasonably
expect that the rest of DN 16 would also be composed in this style. But it isn’t.
The events in 8:5, together with an intervening incident not included in 8:5, are
the only parts of DN 16 narrated in the campÒ style. This suggests—even though
it doesn’t prove—that 8:5 was composed separately before it was included in DN
16.
    Thus this second set of formal arguments proves nothing about the relative
earliness or lateness of the Ud›na.
    A third set of formal arguments is based on the fact that neither the Chinese
nor the Tibetan canons contain any text corresponding to the Ud›na. Both
canons contain versions of Dharmatr›ta’s Ud›navarga mentioned above, with
stories relegated to commentaries on the verses. Because these canons treat the
stories as later additions, it has been argued that the Ud›na in the Pali Canon was
composed after the schools represented in the Chinese and Tibetan canons split
off from the Therav›da.
    This argument, however, is based on the assumption that these other two
canons contain complete accounts of what was available in India at the time they
were compiled. However, the Tibetan canon contains very few “Hınay›na”
texts, as its compilers were much more interested in the later vehicles, so the lack
of the Ud›na in this compilation proves nothing.
    Similarly, the collection of “Hınay›na” texts in the Chinese canon, while more
complete than that in the Tibetan, is still fairly haphazard. There is no complete
canon from any of the early schools; the different nik›yas (or ›gamas as they are
called in the Chinese collection) apparently come from a variety of early schools.
And the Chinese canon itself was a late attempt, during the early Sung dynasty,
to gather whatever texts, through happenstance, had made their way to China
and into Chinese translation by the time of the T’ang dynasty and had survived
into the Sung.
    We do know that some of the texts brought to China during the T’ang are
not in the collection. In 645, the pilgrim-monk Hsüan-tsang returned to the
Chinese capital with a hoard of more than 675 Buddhist texts, many of them new
to China, that he had acquired during a long overland trip to India. The emperor
at the time was impressed with Hsüan-tsang’s achievement and provided him
with the resources needed to set up an expert board of translators. However,
most of the texts were never translated. After Hsüan-tsang’s death and the death
                                                                              130


of the emperor, the emperor’s successor, who had no interest in Buddhism,
disbanded the board of translators and sequestered the texts in the imperial
library, where they were eventually lost or destroyed. We know that at least one
“Hınay›na” text was in Hsüan-tsang’s hoard, as there is a partial Itivuttaka
among his translations. There may have been other similar texts as well.
    Thus the lack of an Ud›na in the Chinese canon does not prove that the
Ud›na as we have it was a late text. It simply may not have attracted the
attention of the Chinese or their Central Asia teachers; or it may have been in
Hsüan-tsang’s collection but later lost.
    So none of these three sets of arguments from the form of the text prove
anything about the relative earliness or lateness of the Ud›na we now have.
    The two main arguments from content are similarly inconclusive.
    The first of these arguments is that the stories of the Ud›na contain too many
supernatural elements to be genuine. This, of course, assumes that people close
to the Buddha witnessed no supernatural events surrounding his teaching—an
assumption that derives less from any knowledge about what actually happened
in the Buddha’s life, and more from a modern discomfort with the supernatural.
Stories about people levitating, using clairvoyant powers, etc.—unless presented
as fiction—offend modern materialistic sensibilities. Modern scholars like to
assume that the Buddha and his early disciples shared these sensibilities, and that
religious and supernatural elements could have been added to the texts only
after those who had directly known the Buddha had passed away. Yet the Canon
consistently shows the Buddha to have been an opponent of materialism (DN 2;
AN 3:138; MN 60). Thus there is no reason to assume that he or his direct
disciples would have been disinclined to believe or report what, from a
materialistic perspective, would count as supernatural powers or events.
    As for the actual possibility of such powers, modern science has yet to
disprove that they exist. Recent advances in sub-atomic physics and the study of
the dynamics of complex non-linear systems show that the physical world is
much stranger and less deterministic than the materialistic linear sciences of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries would have allowed for, and yet a lot of
modern thinking outside of the sciences has not caught up with this fact.
    At the same time, there is no way that a fair assessment of the powers
attainable through meditation could be made by anyone who has yet to master
meditation. It would be like a future race of philosophers trying to assess
modern scientific discoveries without having mastered the scientific method
themselves. Just because there is no room in one’s philosophy for a particular
skill doesn’t mean that such skills can’t be acquired. Why make the limitations of
one’s imagination the measure of the actual world?
    The second argument for the lateness of the Ud›na based on its content
focuses not on the stories, but on some of the exclamations themselves: those in
8:1, 8:3, and 8:4 describing unbinding as a dimension that can be experienced. The
argument is this: Because the consciousness-aggregate ends with the attaining of
unbinding, any description of unbinding as a dimension that can be experienced
is suspect. Therefore these exclamations must be later additions to the Canon.
                                                                                131


    This argument is based on the assumption that there can be no consciousness
outside of the consciousness-aggregate, inasmuch as the definition of that
aggregate concludes with the phrase that it includes, “all consciousness, past,
present, and future” (SN 22:59). However, the Buddha elsewhere limits the term
“all” to what can be known in conjunction with the six senses (SN 35:23). And
there are other passages, aside from these passages in the Ud›na, indicating that
there can be something known outside of the six senses (DN 11, MN 49, SN
35:117). DN 11 and MN 49, in fact, refer to this awareness as “consciousness
without feature” or “consciousness without surface” (viññ›˚aª anidassanaª).
Because this consciousness lies outside of the dimension of time—it’s ak›lika—it is
neither momentary nor eternal, and cannot be labeled as past, present, or future,
for all such concepts have meaning only within the dimension of time. Thus it lies
outside the definition of the consciousness-aggregate, and would not be ended
when that aggregate ceases, either in the experience of awakening or after the
death of the arahant.
    (Another argument that there can be no consciousness outside of the
consciousness-aggregate is based on a mistranslation of MN 38. Because the
argument is technical, I will omit it here. If you are interested, you can find it in
the notes to my translation of that discourse and in Skill in Questions, chapter 5,
§72, note 2.)
    All of this means that the exclamations in 8:1, 8:3, and 8:4 do not conflict with
the rest of the Canon. In fact, Iti 43 also contains the exclamation in 8:3, and MN
144 and SN 35:87 cite the exclamation in 8:4 as a teaching of the Buddha. So there
is no reason to dismiss these passages as late.
    All of which means that the arguments for the lateness of the Ud›na—
whether based on form or on content—have yet to provide any compelling
reason to regard the Ud›na as a late addition to the Canon.



A PPEND IX TWO

   Exclamations by the Buddha recorded elsewhere in the Canon but not included in the
Ud›na:

   From MN 75: To M›gandiya (M›gandiya Sutta)

    “Now what do you think, M›gandiya? Have you ever seen or heard of a
king or king’s minister—enjoying himself, provided & endowed with the five
strands of sensual pleasure, without abandoning sensual craving, without
removing sensual fever—who has dwelt or will dwell or is dwelling free from
thirst, his mind inwardly at peace?”
    “No, Master Gotama.”
    “Very good, M›gandiya. Neither have I ever seen or heard of a king or
king’s minister—enjoying himself, provided & endowed with the five strands of
sensual pleasure, without abandoning sensual craving, without removing
                                                                              132


sensual fever—who has dwelt or will dwell or is dwelling free from thirst, his
mind inwardly at peace. But whatever contemplatives or brahmans who have
dwelt or will dwell or are dwelling free from thirst, their minds inwardly at
peace, all have done so having realized—as it has come to be—the origination &
disappearance, the allure, the danger, & the escape from sensual pleasures,
having abandoned sensual craving and removed sensual fever.”
    Then at that moment the Blessed One exclaimed,
      “Freedom from disease: the foremost good fortune.
                 Unbinding: the foremost ease.
              The eightfold: the foremost of paths
                        going to the
                               Deathless,
                               Secure.”
     When this was said, M›gandiya the wanderer said to the Blessed One, “It’s
amazing, Master Gotama. It’s astounding, how this, too, is well-stated by Master
Gotama: ‘Freedom from disease: the foremost good fortune. Unbinding: the
foremost ease.’ We have also heard this said by earlier wanderers in the lineage
of our teachers: ‘Freedom from disease: the foremost good fortune. Unbinding:
the foremost ease.’ This agrees with that.”
     “But as for what you have heard said by earlier wanderers in the lineage of
your teachers, M›gandiya—‘Freedom from disease: the foremost good fortune.
Unbinding: the foremost ease’—which freedom from disease is that, which
unbinding?”
     When this was said, M›gandiya the wanderer rubbed his own limbs with his
hand. “This is that freedom from disease, Master Gotama,” he said. “This is that
unbinding. For I am now free from disease, happy, and nothing afflicts me.”
     “M›gandiya, it’s just as if there were a man blind from birth who couldn’t see
black objects… white… blue… yellow… red… or pink objects; who couldn’t see
even or uneven places, the stars, the sun, or the moon. He would hear a man
with good eyesight saying, ‘How wonderful, good sirs, is a white cloth—
beautiful, spotless, & clean.’ He would go in search of something white. Then
another man would fool him with a grimy, oil-stained rag: ‘Here, my good man,
is a white cloth—beautiful, spotless, & clean.’ The blind man would take it and
put it on. Having put it on, gratified, he would exclaim words of gratification,
‘How wonderful, good sirs, is a white cloth—beautiful, spotless, & clean.’ Now
what do you think, M›gandiya? When that man blind from birth took the grimy,
oil-stained rag and put it on; and, having put it on, gratified, exclaimed words of
gratification, ‘How wonderful, good sirs, is a white cloth—beautiful, spotless, &
clean’: Did he do so knowing & seeing, or out of faith in the man with good
eyesight?”
     “Of course he did it not knowing & not seeing, Master Gotama, but out of
faith in the man with good eyesight.”
     “In the same way, M›gandiya, the wanderers of other sects are blind &
eyeless. Without knowing freedom from disease, without seeing unbinding, they
still speak this verse:
                                                                                133


       ‘Freedom from disease:      the foremost good fortune.
                  Unbinding:       the foremost ease.’
   This verse was stated by earlier worthy ones, fully self-awakened:
       ‘Freedom from disease: the foremost good fortune.
                  Unbinding:    the foremost ease.
               The eightfold:   the foremost of paths
                         going to the
                                Deathless,
                                Secure.’
     “But now it has gradually become a verse of ordinary people.
    “This body, M›gandiya, is a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction.
And yet you say, with reference to this body, which is a disease, a cancer, an
arrow, painful, an affliction: ‘This is that freedom from disease, Master Gotama.
This is that unbinding,’ for you don’t have the noble vision with which you
would know freedom from disease and see unbinding.”
    “I’m convinced, Master Gotama, that you can teach me the Dhamma in such
a way that I would know freedom from disease, that I would see unbinding.”
    “M›gandiya, it’s just as if there were a man blind from birth who couldn’t see
black objects… white… blue… yellow… red… pink… the sun, or the moon. His
friends, companions, & relatives would take him to a doctor. The doctor would
concoct medicine for him, but in spite of the medicine his eyesight would not
appear or grow clear. What do you think, M›gandiya? Would that doctor have
nothing but his share of weariness & disappointment?”
    “Yes, Master Gotama.”
    “In the same way, M›gandiya, if I were to teach you the Dhamma—‘This is
that freedom from disease; this is that unbinding’—and you on your part did not
know freedom from disease or see unbinding, that would be wearisome for me;
that would be troublesome for me.”
    “I’m convinced, Master Gotama, that you can teach me the Dhamma in such
a way that I would know freedom from disease, that I would see unbinding.”
    “M›gandiya, it’s just as if there were a man blind from birth who couldn’t see
black objects… white… blue… yellow… red… pink… the sun, or the moon.
Now suppose that a certain man were to take a grimy, oil-stained rag and fool
him, saying, ‘Here, my good man, is a white cloth—beautiful, spotless, & clean.’
The blind man would take it and put it on.
    “Then his friends, companions, & relatives would take him to a doctor. The
doctor would concoct medicine for him: purges from above & purges from
below, ointments & counter-ointments and treatments through the nose. And
thanks to the medicine his eyesight would appear & grow clear. Then together
with the arising of his eyesight, he would abandon whatever passion & delight
he felt for that grimy, oil-stained rag. And he would regard that man as an
enemy & no friend at all, and think that he deserved to be killed. ‘My gosh, how
long have I been fooled, cheated, & deceived by that man & his grimy, oil-
stained rag!—“Here, my good man, is a white cloth—beautiful, spotless, &
clean.”’
                                                                                   134


    “In the same way, M›gandiya, if I were to teach you the Dhamma—‘This is
that freedom from Disease; this is that unbinding’—and you on your part were
to know that freedom from Disease and see that unbinding, then together with
the arising of your eyesight you would abandon whatever passion & delight you
felt with regard for the five clinging-aggregates. And it would occur to you, ‘My
gosh, how long have I been fooled, cheated, & deceived by this mind! For in
clinging, it was just form that I was clinging to… it was just feeling… just
perception… just fabrications… just consciousness that I was clinging to. With
my clinging as a requisite condition, there arises becoming… birth… aging-&-
death… sorrow, lamentation, pains, distresses, & despairs. And thus is the origin
of this entire mass of stress.’”
    “I’m convinced, Master Gotama, that you can teach me the Dhamma in such
a way that I might rise up from this seat cured of my blindness.”
    “In that case, M›gandiya, associate with men of integrity. When you associate
with men of integrity, you will hear the true Dhamma. When you hear the true
Dhamma, you will practice the Dhamma in accordance with the Dhamma. When
you practice the Dhamma in accordance with the Dhamma, you will know & see
for yourself: ‘These things are diseases, cancers, arrows. And here is where
diseases, cancers, & arrows cease without trace. With the cessation of that
clinging of mine comes the cessation of becoming. With the cessation of
becoming comes the cessation of birth. With the cessation of birth then aging-&-
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair all cease. Such is the
cessation of this entire mass of suffering & stress.’”


   SN 22:55 Exclamation (Ud›na Sutta)

    At S›vatthı. There the Blessed One exclaimed this exclamation: “‘It should not
be, it should not occur to me [should not be mine]; it will not be, it will not occur
to me [will not be mine]’: A monk set on this would break the [five] lower
fetters.”
    When this was said, a certain monk said to the Blessed One, “In what way
would a monk set on this—‘It should not be, it should not occur to me; it will not
be, it will not occur to me’—break the [five] lower fetters?”1
    “There is the case, monk, where an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person—
who has no regard for noble ones, is not well-versed or disciplined in their
Dhamma; who has no regard for men of integrity, is not well-versed or
disciplined in their Dhamma—assumes form to be the self, or the self as
possessing form, or form as in the self, or the self as in form.
    “He assumes feeling to be the self, or the self as possessing feeling, or feeling
as in the self, or the self as in feeling. He assumes perception to be the self, or the
self as possessing perception, or perception as in the self, or the self as in
perception. He assumes fabrications to be the self, or the self as possessing
fabrications, or fabrications as in the self, or the self as in fabrications. He
assumes consciousness to be the self, or the self as possessing consciousness, or
consciousness as in the self, or the self as in consciousness.
                                                                                 135


    “He doesn’t discern, as it has come to be, inconstant form as ‘inconstant
form.’ He doesn’t discern, as it has come to be, inconstant feeling as ‘inconstant
feeling’ … inconstant perception as ‘inconstant perception’ … inconstant
fabrications as ‘inconstant fabrications’ … inconstant consciousness as ‘inconstant
consciousness.’
    “He doesn’t discern, as it has come to be, stressful form as ‘stressful form’ …
stressful feeling as ‘stressful feeling’ … stressful perception as ‘stressful
perception’ … stressful fabrications as ‘stressful fabrications’ … stressful
consciousness as ‘stressful consciousness.’
    “He doesn’t discern, as it has come to be, not-self form as ‘not-self form’ …
not-self feeling as ‘not-self feeling’ … not-self perception as ‘not-self perception’
… not-self fabrications as ‘not-self fabrications’ … not-self consciousness as ‘not-
self consciousness.’
    “He doesn’t discern, as it has come to be, fabricated form as ‘fabricated form’
… fabricated feeling as ‘fabricated feeling’ … fabricated perception as ‘fabricated
perception’ … fabricated fabrications as ‘fabricated fabrications’ … fabricated
consciousness as ‘fabricated consciousness.’
    “He doesn’t discern, as it has come to be, that ‘form will stop becoming’ …
‘feeling will stop becoming’ … ‘perception will stop becoming’ … ‘fabrications
will stop becoming’ … ‘consciousness will stop becoming.’
    “Now, a well-instructed disciple of the noble ones—who has regard for noble
ones, is well-versed & disciplined in their Dhamma; who has regard for men of
integrity, is well-versed & disciplined in their Dhamma—does not assume form
to be the self, or the self as possessing form, or form as in the self, or the self as
in form. He does not assume feeling to be the self.… does not assume perception
to be the self.… does not assume fabrications to be the self.… He does not
assume consciousness to be the self, or the self as possessing consciousness, or
consciousness as in the self, or the self as in consciousness.
    “He discerns, as it has come to be, inconstant form as ‘inconstant form’ …
inconstant feeling as ‘inconstant feeling’ … inconstant perception as ‘inconstant
perception’ … inconstant fabrications as ‘inconstant fabrications’ … inconstant
consciousness as ‘inconstant consciousness.’
    “He discerns, as it has come to be, stressful form as ‘stressful form’ …
stressful feeling as ‘stressful feeling’ … stressful perception as ‘stressful
perception’ … stressful fabrications as ‘stressful fabrications’ … stressful
consciousness as ‘stressful consciousness.’
    “He discerns, as it has come to be, not-self form as ‘not-self form’ … not-self
feeling as ‘not-self feeling’ … not-self perception as ‘not-self perception’ … not-
self fabrications as ‘not-self fabrications’ … not-self consciousness as ‘not-self
consciousness.’
    “He discerns, as it has come to be, fabricated form as ‘fabricated form’ …
fabricated feeling as ‘fabricated feeling’ … fabricated perception as ‘fabricated
perception’ … fabricated fabrications as ‘fabricated fabrications’ … fabricated
consciousness as ‘fabricated consciousness.’
                                                                                136


    “He discerns, as it has come to be, that ‘form will stop becoming’ … ‘feeling
will stop becoming’ … ‘perception will stop becoming’ … ‘fabrications will stop
becoming’ … ‘consciousness will stop becoming.’
    “From the non-becoming of form, from the non-becoming of feeling… of
perception… of fabrications… of consciousness, a monk set on this—‘It should
not be, it should not occur to me; it will not be, it will not occur to me’—would
break the [five] lower fetters.”
    “Lord, a monk set on this would break the [five] lower fetters. But for one
knowing in what way, seeing in what way, is there the immediate ending of
fermentations?”
    “There is the case where an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person… falls into
fear over what is not grounds for fear. There is fear for an uninstructed run-of-
the-mill person [who thinks], ‘It should not be, it should not occur to me; it will
not be, it will not occur to me.’ But an instructed disciple of the noble ones does
not fall into fear over what is not grounds for fear. There is no fear for an
instructed disciple of the noble ones [who thinks], ‘It should not be, it should not
occur to me; it will not be, it will not occur to me.’
    “Should consciousness, when standing, stand attached to form, supported by
form [as its object], landing on form, watered with delight, it would exhibit
growth, increase, & proliferation.
    “Should consciousness, when standing, stand attached to feeling, supported
by feeling [as its object], landing on feeling, watered with delight, it would
exhibit growth, increase, & proliferation.
    “Should consciousness, when standing, stand attached to perception,
supported by perception [as its object], landing on perception, watered with
delight, it would exhibit growth, increase, & proliferation.
    “Should consciousness, when standing, stand attached to fabrications,
supported by fabrications [as its object], landing on fabrications, watered with
delight, it would exhibit growth, increase, & proliferation.
    “Were someone to say, ‘I will describe a coming, a going, a passing away, an
arising, a growth, an increase, or a proliferation of consciousness apart from
form, from feeling, from perception, from fabrications,’ that would be
impossible.
    “If a monk abandons passion for the property of form.…
    “If a monk abandons passion for the property of feeling.…
    “If a monk abandons passion for the property of perception.…
    “If a monk abandons passion for the property of fabrications.…
    “If a monk abandons passion for the property of consciousness, then owing
to the abandonment of passion, the support is cut off, and there is no landing of
consciousness. Consciousness, thus not having landed, not increasing, not
concocting, is released. Owing to release, it is steady. Owing to steadiness, it is
contented. Owing to contentment, it is not agitated. Not agitated, he [the monk]
is totally unbound right within. He discerns that ‘Birth is ended, the holy life
fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for this world.’
    “For one knowing in this way, seeing in this way, monk, there is the
immediate ending of fermentations.”
                                                                                              137



    N O T E : 1. The five lower fetters are self-identity views, uncertainty, grasping at habits &
practices, sensual desire, and ill will.


    From SN 56:11 The Tath›gata (Tath›gata Sutta)

    That is what the Blessed One said. Gratified, the group of five monks
delighted in the Blessed One’s words. And while this explanation was being
given, there arose to Ven. Ko˚˜añña the dustless, stainless Dhamma eye:
Whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation.
    And when the Blessed One had set the Wheel of Dhamma in motion, the
earth deities cried out: “At V›r›˚ası, in the Game Refuge at Isipatana, the Blessed
One has set in motion the unexcelled Wheel of Dhamma that cannot be stopped
by contemplative, brahman, deva, M›ra, Brahm›, or anyone at all in the
cosmos.” On hearing the earth devas’ cry, the devas of the Four Kings took up
the cry… On hearing the devas of the Four Kings’ cry, the devas of the Thirty-
three… the devas of the Hours… the Contented devas… the Devas Who Enjoy
Creation… the Devas Who Control the Creations of Others… the devas of
Brahm›’s retinue took up the cry: “At V›r›˚ası, in the Game Refuge at Isipatana,
the Blessed One has set in motion the unexcelled Wheel of Dhamma that cannot
be stopped by contemplative, brahman, deva, M›ra, Brahm› or anyone at all in
the cosmos.”
    So in that moment, that instant, the cry shot right up to the Brahma worlds.
And this ten-thousand fold cosmos shivered & quivered & quaked, while a great,
measureless radiance appeared in the cosmos, surpassing the effulgence of the
devas.
    Then the Blessed One exclaimed: “So you really know, Ko˚˜añña? So you
really know?” And that is how Ven. Ko˚˜añña acquired the name Añña-
Ko˚˜añña—Ko˚˜añña who knows.



A PPEND IX THR EE

    Sutta passages in Saªyutta Nik›ya 3 and 4 that may have originally been composed
as ud›nas:

    SN 3:8 = Ud 5:1

    SN 3:9 Sacrifice (Yañña Sutta)

   At S›vatthı. Now on that occasion a great sacrifice had been arranged for
King Pasenadi Kosala. Five hundred bulls, five hundred bullocks, five hundred
cows, five hundred goats, & five hundred rams had been led to the pillar for the
sacrifice. And his slaves, servants, & workers—threatened with punishment,
                                                                                      138


threatened with danger—were making preparations, weeping, their faces
stained with tears.
    Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & outer robes—went into S›vatthı for alms.
Having gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms
round, they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One,
“Lord, a great sacrifice has now been arranged for King Pasenadi Kosala. Five
hundred bulls, five hundred bullocks, five hundred cows, five hundred goats, &
five hundred rams have been led to the pillar for the sacrifice. And his slaves,
servants, & workers—threatened with punishment, threatened with danger—
are making preparations, weeping, their faces stained with tears.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
spoke these verses:

       The horse sacrifice, the human sacrifice,
       samm›p›sa, v›japeyya, niragga˘a1
       —great sacrifices, greatly violent—
       bear no great fruit.
       Where goats, rams, & cattle
       of various kinds are killed:
       Those of right conduct, great seers,
       don’t attend that sacrifice.
       But sacrifices free from violence,
       offered always in line with family custom,
       where goats, rams, & cattle
       of various kinds are not killed:
       Those of right conduct, great seers,
       attend that sacrifice.
       The wise person should offer that.
       This sacrifice bears great fruit.
       For one who offers this,
       things get better, not worse.
              The sacrifice is abundant,
              and the devat›s are appeased.

   N O T E : 1 . Three types of sacrifice defined by details in the equipment used.



   SN 3:10 Bonds (Bandhana Sutta)

   At S›vatthı. Now on that occasion a great group of people had been put into
bondage by King Pasenadi Kosala—some with ropes, some with wooden
shackles, some with chains.
                                                                           139


   Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & outer robes—went into S›vatthı for alms.
Having gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms
round, they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One,
“Lord, a great group of people has now been put into bondage by King Pasenadi
Kosala—some with ropes, some with wooden shackles, some with chains.”
   Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
spoke these verses:

      That’s not a strong bond
      —so say the enlightened—
      the one made of iron, of wood, or of grass.
      To be smitten, enthralled,
             with jewels & ornaments,
             longing for children & wives:
      That’s the strong bond,
      —so say the enlightened—
      one that’s constraining,
             elastic,
             hard to untie.
      But having cut it, they
      —the enlightened—go forth,
      free of longing, abandoning
             sensual ease.1

   N O T E : 1 . These verses = Dhp 345–346.



   SN 3:11 = Ud 6:2 but with a different verse:

      Not by appearance
      is a man rightly known,
      nor should trust be based
      on a quick glance,
      for, disguised as well-restrained,
      the unrestrained go through this world.
      A counterfeit earring made of clay,
      a bronze half-dollar coated in gold:
      They go about in this world
      hidden all around—
              impure inside,
              beautiful out.
                                                                                  140


   SN 3:14–15 A Battle (Saºg›ma Suttas)

    Staying at S›vatthı. Then King Aj›tasattu of Magadha, the son of Queen
Videh›, raising a fourfold army, marched toward K›si against King Pasenadi
Kosala. King Pasenadi heard, “King Aj›tasattu of Magadha, the son of Queen
Videh›, they say, has raised a fourfold army and is marching toward K›si
against me.” So King Pasenadi, raising a fourfold army, launched a counter-
attack toward K›si against King Aj›tasattu. Then King Aj›tasattu & King
Pasenadi fought a battle, and in that battle King Aj›tasattu defeated King
Pasenadi. King Pasenadi, defeated, marched back to his capital at S›vatthı.
    Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & outer robes—went into S›vatthı for alms.
Having gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms
round, they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they said to the Blessed One,
“Just now, lord, King Aj›tasattu of Magadha, the son of Queen Videh›, raising a
fourfold army, marched toward K›si against King Pasenadi Kosala. King
Pasenadi heard, ‘King Aj›tasattu of Magadha, the son of Queen Videh›, they say,
has raised a fourfold army and is marching toward K›si against me.’ So King
Pasenadi, raising a fourfold army, launched a counter-attack toward K›si against
King Aj›tasattu. Then King Aj›tasattu & King Pasenadi fought a battle, and in
that battle King Aj›tasattu defeated King Pasenadi. King Pasenadi, defeated,
marched back to his capital at S›vatthı.”
    “Monks, King Aj›tasattu has evil friends, evil comrades, evil companions,
whereas King Pasenadi has fine friends, fine comrades, fine companions. Yet for
now, King Pasenadi will lie down tonight in pain, defeated.”
    That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-Gone, the
Teacher, said further:

       Winning gives birth to hostility.
       Losing, one lies down in pain.
       The calmed lie down with ease,
              having set
              winning & losing
                     aside.

    Then King Aj›tasattu of M›gadha, the son of Queen Videh›, raising a
fourfold army, marched toward K›si against King Pasenadi Kosala. King
Pasenadi heard, “King Aj›tasattu of Magadha, the son of Queen Videh›, they
say, has raised a fourfold army and is marching toward K›si against me.” So
King Pasenadi, raising a fourfold army, launched a counter-attack toward K›si
against King Aj›tasattu. Then King Aj›tasattu & King Pasenadi fought a battle,
and in that battle King Pasenadi defeated King Aj›tasattu and captured him alive.
    The thought then occurred to King Pasenadi, “Even though King Aj›tasattu
has wronged me when I have done him no wrong, still he is my nephew. What if
I, having confiscated all his elephant troops, all his cavalry, all his chariots, & all
                                                                               141


his infantry, were to let him go with just his life?” So King Pasenadi—having
confiscated all his elephant troops, cavalry, chariots, & infantry—let King
Aj›tasattu go with just his life.
    Then in the early morning, a large number of monks adjusted their under
robes and—carrying their bowls & outer robes—went into S›vatthı for alms.
Having gone for alms in S›vatthı, after the meal, returning from their alms
round, they went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to
him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there, they [reported these events to
the Blessed One].
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
spoke these verses:

       A man may plunder
       as long as it serves his ends,
       but when others are plundered,
              he who has plundered
              gets plundered in turn.
       A fool thinks,
       ‘Now’s my chance,’
       as long as his evil
       has yet to ripen.
       But when it ripens,
       the fool
              falls
                      into pain.
       Killing, you gain
                     your killer.
       Conquering, you gain one
                     who will conquer you;
       insulting,    insult;
       harassing, harassment.
       And so, through the cycle of action,
             he who has plundered
             gets plundered in turn.

   SN 4:21 A Large Number (Sambahula Sutta)

    I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying among the
Sakyans at Sil›vatı. And on that occasion a large number of monks were staying
not far from the Blessed One: heedful, ardent, & resolute.
    Then M›ra the Evil One, assuming the appearance of a brahman—with a
large coiled top-knot, clad in an antelope hide, aged, crooked like a roof support,
wheezing, holding a staff of fig wood—went to the monks and, on arrival, said
to them, “You have gone forth while young, masters—black-haired, endowed
                                                                                   142


with the blessings of youth in the first stage of life—without having played with
sensuality. Enjoy human sensuality, monks. Don’t drop what is visible here-&-
now in pursuit of what’s subject to time.”
    “Brahman, we’re not dropping what’s visible here-&-now in pursuit of what’s
subject to time. We’re dropping what’s subject to time in pursuit of what’s visible
here-&-now. For the Blessed One has said that sensuality is subject to time, of
much stress, much despair, & greater drawbacks; whereas this Dhamma is
visible here-&-now, not subject to time, inviting all to come & see, pertinent, to
be known by the observant for themselves.”
    When this was said, M›ra the Evil One—shaking his head, wagging his
tongue, raising his eyebrows so that his forehead was wrinkled in three
furrows—left, leaning on his stick.
    So the monks went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down
to him, sat to one side. As they were sitting there they [told him what had
happened].
    “That wasn’t a brahman, monks. That was M›ra the Evil One, come to blind
you.”
    Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion
spoke these verses:

       One who has seen the cause
       from which suffering comes:
               How could that person
               incline to sensuality?
       Having realized
       that acquisition is a tie
       in the world,
       a person should train
       to subdue
       just that.



A PPEND IX F O U R

    Pre-eminent disciples of the Buddha mentioned in the Ud›na, and the areas in which,
according to AN 1:146-152 (as numbered in the Thai edition), they were pre-eminent:
    (Those whose outstanding quality is depicted in the Ud›na are marked with an
asterisk.)

   Monks (22 out of 40)
finanda: in being learned, mindful, steadfast, in having wide understanding, and
   in being an attendant
Anuruddha: in the divine eye
B›hiya of the Bark-cloth: in gaining quick realization*
                                                                            143


Bhaddiya the Dwarf: in having a charming voice
Bhaddiya K›˘igodh›’s son: in coming from a prominent family
Dabba Mallaputta: in arranging lodgings
Kacc›yana, Mah›: in explaining in detail the meaning of brief statements
Kappina, Mah›: in exhorting the monks
Kassapa, Mah›: in teaching strictness*
Ko˚˜añña, Aññ›ta: in seniority
Ko˛˛hita, Mah›: in attaining acumen
Moggall›na, Mah›: in having (psychic) power*
Nanda: in guarding the sense doors
Panthaka, CÒ˘a: in creating a mind-made body and in being skilled in the
    evolution of awareness
Pilindavaccha: in being dear to devatas
Pi˚˜ola Bh›radv›ja: in giving the lion’s roar
Revata the Doubter: in possessing jh›na
Revata (Khadiravaniya = of the acacia grove): in living in the wilderness
S›riputta: in having great discernment
So˚a Ko˛ika˚˚a: in having a fine delivery*
SubhÒti: in living without conflict and in deserving offerings
Upasena Vaºgantaputta: in being all-around inspiring


   Female lay followers (3 out of 10)
S›m›vatı: in dwelling in good will
Suppav›s›: in donating exquisite gifts*
Vis›kh›, Mig›ra’s mother: in being a donor
                                                                                 144




                                    Glossary

Arahant: A “worthy one” or “pure one;” a person whose mind is free of
   defilement and thus is not destined for further rebirth. An epithet for the
   Buddha and the highest level of his noble disciples.
Ariya: (1) Noble. (2) Pertaining to the race that ruled northern India.
fisava: Fermentation; effluent. Four qualities—sensuality, views, becoming, and
    ignorance—that “flow out” of the mind and create the flood of the round of
    death and rebirth.
Asuras: A race of heavenly beings who, like the Titans of Greek mythology,
   fought the devas for sovereignty over the heavens and lost.
Bodhisatta: “A being (striving) for awakening;” the term used to describe the
   Buddha before he actually became Buddha, from his first aspiration to
   Buddhahood until the time of his full awakening. Sanskrit form: bodhisattva.
Brahm›: A higher level of deva, inhabiting the heavenly realms of form or
   formlessness.
Brahman: In common usage, a brahman is a member of the priestly caste, which
   claimed to be the highest caste in India, based on birth. In a specifically
   Buddhist usage, “brahman” can also mean an arahant, conveying the point
   that excellence is based, not on birth or race, but on the qualities attained in
   the mind.
Deva (devat›): Literally, “shining one.” A level of being above the human,
   inhabiting either celestial or terrestrial realms.
Dhamma: (1) Event; a phenomenon in and of itself; (2) action; (3) mental quality;
   (4) doctrine, teaching; (5) unbinding (although some passages in the Canon
   describe unbinding as the abandoning of all dhammas). Sanskrit form:
   dharma.
Gandhabba: (1) A celestial musician, the lowest level of celestial deva. (2) A being
   about to take birth.
Jh›na: Mental absorption. A state of strong concentration focused on a single
   sensation or mental notion. This term is related to the verb jh›yati, which
   means to burn with a steady, still flame. Sanskrit form: dhy›na.
Kamma: Intentional act. Sanskrit form: karma.
M›ra: The personification of evil and temptation.
N›ga: A term commonly used to refer to strong, stately, and heroic animals,
   such as elephants and magical serpents. In Buddhism, it is also used to refer to
   those who have attained the goal of the practice.
                                                                               145


Nibb›na: Literally, the “unbinding” of the mind from passion, aversion, and
   delusion; from the entire round of death and rebirth; and from all that can be
   described or defined. As this term also denotes the extinguishing of a fire, it
   carries connotations of stilling, cooling, and peace. Sanskrit form: nirv›˚a.
Parinibb›na: Total unbinding, which in some contexts denotes the experience of
   awakening; in others, the final passing away of an arahant. Sanskrit form:
   parinirv›˚a.
Pas›da: Confidence; clarity.
P›˛imokkha: Basic code of monastic discipline, composed of 227 rules for monks
    and 311 for nuns.
Saªs›ra: Transmigration; the process of wandering through repeated states of
   becoming, with their attendant death and rebirth.
Saªvega: A sense of dismay over the meaninglessness and futility of life as it is
   ordinarily lived, combined with a strong sense of urgency in looking for a
   way out.
Saºgha: On the conventional (sammati) level, this term denotes the communities
  of Buddhist monks and nuns. On the ideal (ariya) level, it denotes those
  followers of the Buddha, lay or ordained, who have attained at least stream-
  entry.
StÒpa: A memorial to a dead person, derived from the form of a burial mound.
Sukha: Pleasure; happiness; bliss; ease; wellbeing.
Sutta: Discourse. Sanskrit form: sÒtra.
T›din: “Such,” an adjective to describe one who has attained the goal. It indicates
   that the person’s state is indefinable but not subject to change or influences of
   any sort.
Tath›gata: Literally, “one who has truly gone (tatha-gata)” or “one who has
   become authentic (tatha-›gata),” an epithet used in ancient India for a person
   who has attained the highest spiritual goal. In Buddhism, it usually denotes
   the Buddha, although occasionally it also denotes any of his arahant disciples.
Uposatha: Observance day, coinciding with the full moon, new moon, and half
   moons. Lay Buddhists often observe the eight precepts on this day. Monks
   recite the P›˛imokkha on the full moon and new moon uposathas.
Vinaya: The monastic discipline, whose rules and traditions comprise six volumes
   in printed text. The Buddha’s own term for the religion he founded was “this
   Dhamma & Vinaya.”
Yakkha: Spirit; a lower level of deva—sometimes friendly to human beings,
   sometimes not—often dwelling in trees or other wild places.
                                                                           146




                            Abbreviations
                 AN     Aºguttara Nik›ya
                 Cv     Cullavagga
                 Dhp    Dhammapada
                 DN     Dıgha Nik›ya
                 Iti    Itivuttaka
                 MN     Majjhima Nik›ya
                 Mv     Mah›vagga
                 SN     Saªyutta Nik›ya
                 Sn     Sutta Nip›ta
                 Thag   Therag›th›
                 Thig   Therıg›th›
                 Ud     Ud›na



References to DN, Iti, and MN are to discourse (sutta). Those to Dhp are to
verse. Those to Mv and Cv are to chapter, section, and sub-section.
References to other texts are to section (saªyutta, nip›ta, or vagga) and
discourse.
All translations are based on the Royal Thai Edition of the Pali Canon
(Bangkok: Mahamakut Rajavidyalaya, 1982), with variant readings
occasionally taken from Sri Lankan and Burmese editions available online
through the Journal of Buddhist Ethics and the Digital Pali Reader.
                                                                              147



                                Bibliography

Abeynayake, Oliver. A Textual and Historical Analysis of the Khuddaka Nik›ya.
    Colombo: Tisara Press, 1984.
finandajoti, Bhikkhu. A Comparison of the P›˘i Ud›nas and the Buddhist Hybrid
    Sanskrit Ud›navarga. 2003. http://www.ancient-buddhist-texts.net/Buddhist-
    Texts/C2-Udana-Parallels/index.htm.
finandajoti, Bhikkhu, trans. Exalted Utterances. (Ud›na KN 3). Third revised
    version, November 2011, with notes. Accessed November 24, 2011.
    http://www.ancient-buddhist-texts.net/Texts-and-
    Translations/Udana/index.htm.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A New Translation of
    the Saªyutta Nik›ya. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2000.
Gonda, Jan. The Vision of the Vedic Poets. The Hague: Mouton, 1963.
Ireland, John D., trans. The Ud›na: Inspired Utterances of the Buddha. Kandy, Sri
    Lanka: Buddhist Publication Society, 1990.
Sparham, Gareth, trans. The Tibetan Dhammapada: Sayings of the Buddha. London:
    Wisdom Publications, 1986.
≥h›nissaro Bhikkhu, trans. Dhammapada: A Translation. Fifth edition, revised.
    Barre, Massachusetts: Dhamma Dana Publications, 2008.
Vajir›, Sister and Francis Story, trans. Last Days of the Buddha: The Mah›
    Parinibb›na Sutta. Revised edition. Kandy, Sri Lanka: Buddhist Publication
    Society, 1988.
Walshe, Maurice, trans. The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the
    Dıgha Nik›ya. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1995.
Warder, A. K. Indian K›vya Literature, vols. I and II, 2nd rev. eds. Delhi: Motilal
    Banarsidass, 1989 and 1990.
